LT> 

CM 


loo 
en 


•CD 


CO 


THE   LOGICAL   MACHINE. 


THE     PREDICATE -KEY     C     IS     DEPRESSED. 


THE    PRINCIPLES    OF   SCIENCE: 


A  7T^/^rrs3sa&  x/t  ic 


METHOD. 


BY 


W.  STANLEY  JEVONS,  M.A.,  F.R.S., 

FELLOW  OF   UNIVERSITY  COLLEGE,  LONDON  ; 
PROFESSOR  OF  LOGIC  AND  POLITICAL  ECONOMY  IN  THE  OWENS  COLLEGE,    MANCHESTER. 


VOL.  I. 


MACMILLAN     AND     CO. 

1874 

[  The  Right  of  Translation  and  Repruduction  is  reserved.} 


OXFORD: 

B.  PIOKABD  HALL,  AND  J.  H.  STACY, 

PRINTERS   TO   THE    UNIVERSITY. 


PREFACE. 


IT  may  be  truly  asserted  that  the  rapid  progress  of 
the  physical  sciences  during  the  last  three  centuries  has 
not  been  accompanied  by  a  corresponding  advance  in 
the  theory  of  reasoning.  Physicists  speak  familiarly  of 
Scientific  Method,  but  they  could  not  readily  describe 
what  they  mean  by  that  expression.  Profoundly  engaged 
in  the  study  of  particular  classes  of  natural  phenomena, 
they  are  usually  too  much  engrossed  in  the  immense  and 
ever-accumulating  details  of  their  special  sciences,  to 
generalize  upon  the  methods  of  reasoning  which  they 
unconsciously  employ.  Yet  few  will  deny  that  these 
methods  of  reasoning  ought  to  be  studied,  especially  by 
those  who  endeavour  to  introduce  scientific  order  into  less 
successful  and  methodical  branches  of  knowledge. 

The  application  of  Scientific  Method  cannot  be  re 
stricted  to  the  sphere  of  lifeless  objects.  We  must  sooner 
or  later  have  strict  sciences  of  those  mental  and  social 
phenomena,  which,  if  comparison  be  possible,  are  of 
more  interest  to  us  than  purely  material  phenomena. 
But  it  is  the  proper  course  of  reasoning  to  proceed  from 
the  known  to  the  unknown — from  the  evident  to  the 
obscure — from  the  material  and  palpable  to  the  subtle 
and  refined.  The  physical  sciences  may  therefore  be 
properly  made  the  practice-ground  of  the  reasoning 


V 

vi  PREFACE. 


powers,  because  they  furnish  us  with  a  great  body  of 
precise  and  successful  investigations.  In  these  sciences 
we  meet  with  happy  instances  of  unquestionable  deductive 
reasoning,  of  extensive  generalization,  of  happy  prediction, 
of  satisfactory  verification,  of  nice  calculation  of  proba 
bilities.  We  can  note  how  the  slightest  analogical  clue 
has  been  followed  up  to  a  glorious  discovery,  how  a  rash 
generalization  has  at  length  been  exposed,  or  a  conclusive 
experimentum  crucis  has  decided  the  long-continued  strife 
between  two  rival  theories. 

In  following  out  my  design  of  detecting  the  general 
methods  of  inductive  ^investigation,  I  have  found  that  the 
more  elaborate  and  interesting  processes  of  quantitative 
induction  have  their  necessary  foundation  in  the  simpler 
science  of  Formal  Logic.  The  earlier,  and  probably  by 
far  the  least  attractive  part  of  this  work,  consists,  there 
fore,  in  a  statement  of  the  so-called  Fundamental  Laws  of 
Thought,  and  of  the  all-important  Principle  of  Substi 
tution,  of  which,  as  I  think,  all  reasoning  is  a  develop 
ment.  The  whole  procedure  of  inductive  inquiry,  in  its 
most  complex  cases,  is  foreshadowed  in  the  combinational 
view  of  Logic,  which  arises  directly  from  these  fundamental 
principles.  Incidentally  I  have  described  the  mechanical 
arrangements  by  which  the  use  of  the  important  form 
called  the  Logical  Abecedarium,  and  the  whole  working 
of  the  combinational  system  of  Formal  Logic,  may  be  ren 
dered  evident  to  the  eye,  and  easy  to  the  mind  and 
hand. 

The  study  both  of  Formal  Logic  and  of  the  Theory  of 
Probabilities,  has  led  me  to  adopt  the  opinion  that  there 
is  no  such  thing  as  a  distinct  method  of  induction  as  con 
trasted  with  deduction,  but  that  induction  is  simply  an 
inverse  employment  of  deduction.  Within  the  last  cen 
tury  a  reaction  has  been  setting  in  against  the  purely 
empirical  procedure  of  Francis  Bacon,  and  physicists  have 


PREFACE.  vii 


learnt  to  advocate  the  use  of  hypotheses.  I  take  the 
extreme  view  of  holding  that  Francis  Bacon,  although  he 
correctly  insisted  upon  constant  reference  to  experience, 
had  no  correct  notions  as  to  the  logical  method  by  which, 
from  particular  facts,  we  educe  laws  of  nature.  I  en 
deavour  to  show  that  hypothetical  anticipation  of  nature 
is  an  essential  part  of  inductive  inquiry,  and  that  it  is  the 
Newtonian  method  of  deductive  reasoning  combined  with 
elaborate  experimental  verification,  which  has  led  to  all 
the  great  triumphs  of  scientific  research. 

In  attempting  to  give  an  explanation  of  this  view  of 
Scientific  Method,  I  have  first  to  show  that  the  sciences  of 
number  and  quantity  repose  upon  and  spring  from  the 
simpler  and  more  general  science  of  Logic.  The  Theory  of 
Probability,  which  enables  us  to  estimate  and  calculate 
quantities  of  knowledge,  is  then  described,  and  especial 
attention  is  drawn  to  the  Inverse  Method  of  Proba 
bilities,  which  involves,  as  I  conceive,  the  true  principle 
of  inductive  procedure.  No  inductive  conclusions  are  more 
than  probable,  and  I  adopt  the  opinion  that  the  theory  of 
probability  is  an  essential  part  of  logical  method,  so  that 
the  logical  value  of  every  inductive  result  must  be  deter 
mined  consciously  or  unconsciously,  according  to  the 
principles  of  the  inverse  method  of  probability. 

The  phenomena  of  nature  are  commonly  manifested  in. 
quantities  of  time,  space,  force,  energy,  &c.,  and  the  ob 
servation,  measurement,  and  analysis  of  the  various  quan 
titative  conditions  or  results  involved,  even  in  a  simple 
experiment,  demand  much  employment  of  systematic  pro 
cedure.  I  devote  a  book,  therefore,  to  a  simple  and 
general  description  of  the  devices  by  which  exact  measure 
ment  is  effected,  errors  eliminated,  a  probable  mean  result 
attained,  and  the  probable  error  of  that  mean  ascertained. 
I  then  proceed  to  the  principal,  and  probably  the  most 
interesting,  subject  of  the  book,  illustrating  successively 


PREFACE. 


the  conditions  and  precautions  requisite  for  accurate  ob 
servation,  for  successful  experiment,  and  for  the  sure 
detection  of  the  quantitative  laws  of  nature.  As  it  is 
impossible  to  comprehend  aright  the  value  of  quantitative 
laws  without  constantly  bearing  in  mind  the  degree  of 
quantitative  approximation  to  the  truth  probably  attained, 
I  have  devoted  a  special  chapter  to  the  Theory  of  Ap 
proximation,  and  however  imperfectly  I  may  have  treated 
this  subject,  I  must  look  upon  it  as  a  very  essential  part 
of  a  work  on  Scientific  Method. 

It  then  remains  to  illustrate  the  sound  use  of  hypo 
thesis,  to  distinguish  between  the  portions  of  knowledge 
which  we  owe  to  empirical  observation,  to  accidental 
discovery,  or  to  scientific  prediction.  Interesting  questions 
arise  concerning  the  accordance  of  quantitative  theories 
and  experiments,  and  I  point  out  how  the  successive  veri 
fication  of  an  hypothesis  by  distinct  methods  of  experi 
ment  yields  conclusions  approximating  to  but  never 
attaining  certainty.  Additional  illustrations  of  the  general 
procedure  of  inductive  investigations  are  given  in  a 
chapter  on  the  Character  of  the  Experimentalist,  in  which 
I  endeavour  to  show,  moreover,  that  the  inverse  use  of 
deduction  was  really  the  logical  method  of  such  great 
masters  of  experimental  inquiry  as  Newton,  Huyghens, 
and  Faraday. 

In  treating  Generalization  and  Analogy,  I  consider  the 
precautions  requisite  in  inferring  from  one  case  to  another, 
or  from  one  part  of  the  universe  to  another  part,  the 
validity  of  all  such  inferences  resting  ultimately  upon  the 
inverse  method  of  probabilities.  The  treatment  of  Ex 
ceptional  Phenomena  appeared  to  afford  an  interesting 
subject  for  a  further  chapter  illustrating  the  various  modes 
in  which  an  outstanding  fact  may  eventually  be  explained. 
The  formal  part  of  the  book  closes  with  the  subject  of 
Classification,  which  is,  however,  very  inadequately  treated. 


PREFACE. 


I  have,  in  fact,  almost  restricted  myself  to  showing  that 
all  classification  is  fundamentally  carried  out  upon  the 
principles  of  Formal  Logic  and  the  Logical  Abecedarium 
described  at  the  outset. 

In  certain  concluding  remarks  I  have  expressed  the 
conviction  which  the  study  of  Logic  has  by  degrees  forced 
upon  my  mind,  that  serious  misconceptions  are  entertained 
by  some  scientific  men  as  to  the  logical  value  of  our  know 
ledge  of  nature.  We  have  heard  much  of  what  has  been 
aptly  called  the  Reign  of  Law,  and  the  necessity  and  uni 
formity  of  natural  forces  has  been  not  uncommonly  inter 
preted  as  involving  the  non-existence  of  an  intelligent  and 
benevolent  Power,  capable  of  interfering  with  the  course 
of  natural  events.  Fears  have  been  expressed  that  the 
progress  of  Scientific  Method  must  therefore  result  in  dis 
sipating  the  fondest  beliefs  of  the  human  heart.  Even  the 
'  Utility  of  Religion '  is  seriously  proposed  as  a  subject  of 
discussion.  It  seemed  to  be  not  out  of  place  in  a  work  on 
Scientific  Method  to  allude  to  the  ultimate  results  and 
limits  of  that  method.  I  fear  that  I  have  very  imper 
fectly  succeeded  in  expressing  my  strong  conviction  that 
before  a  rigorous  logical  scrutiny  the  Reign  of  Law  will 
prove  to  be  an  unverified  hypothesis,  the  Uniformity  of 
Nature  an  ambiguous  expression,  the  certainty  of  our 
scientific  inferences  to  a  great  extent  a  delusion.  The 
value  of  science  is  of  course  very  high,  while  the  con 
clusions  are  kept  well  within  the  limits  of  the  data  on 
which  they  are  founded,  but  it  is  pointed  out  that  our 
experience  is  of  the  most  limited  character  compared  with 
what  there  is  to  learn,  while  our  mental  powers  seem  to 
fall  infinitely  short  of  the  task  of  comprehending  and 
explaining  fully  the  nature  of  any  one  object.  I  draw  the 
conclusion  that  we  must  interpret  the  results  of  Scientific 
Method  in  an  affirmative  sense  only.  Ours  must  be  a 
truly  positive  philosophy,  not  that  false  negative  philo- 


PREFACE. 


sophy  which,  building  on  a  few  material  facts,  presumes 
to  assert  that  it  has  compassed  the  bounds  of  existence, 
while  it  nevertheless  ignores  the  most  unquestionable 
phenomena  of  the  human  mind  and  feelings. 

I  have  to  thank  my  colleague,  Professor  Barker,  for 
carefully  revising  several  of  the  sheets  most  abounding  in 
mathematical  considerations.  It  is  approximately  certain 
that  in  freely  employing  illustrations  drawn  from  many 
different  sciences,  I  have  frequently  fallen  into  errors  of 
detail.  In  this  respect  I  must  throw  myself  upon  the 
indulgence  of  the  reader,  who  will  bear  in  mind,  as  I  hope, 
that  the  scientific  facts  are  generally  mentioned  purely  for 
the  purpose  of  iUustration,  so  that  inaccuracies  of  detail 
wih1  not  in  the  majority  of  cases  affect  the  truth  of  the 
general  principles  iUustrated. 


December  I5th,  1873. 


CONTENTS. 


BOOK  I. 

FORMAL   LOGIC,    DEDUCTIVE    AND    INDUCTIVE. 
CHAPTER  I. 

INTRODUCTION. 

SECTION  PAGE 

1.  Introduction  ......          1 

2.  The  Powers  of  Mind  concerned  in  the  Creation  of  Science  .         4 

3.  Laws  of  Identity  and  Difference          .              .              .  .6 

4.  The  Nature  and  Authority  of  the  Laws  of  Identity  and  Dif 

ference        .......          7 

5.  The  Process  of  Inference        .              .              .              .  .11 

6.  Deduction  and  Induction        .              .              .              .  .13 

7.  Symbolic  Expression  of  Logical  Inference       .              .  .15 

8.  Expression  of  Identity  and  Difference              .              .  .18 

9.  General  Formula  of  Logical  Inference             .              .  .21 

10.  The  Propagating  Power  of  Identity  .              .              .  .24 

11.  Anticipations  of  the  Principle  of  Substitution              .  .25 

12.  The  Logic  of  Relatives            .             .             .             .  .27 

CHAPTER  II. 

TEBMS. 

1.  Terms  .  .  .....       29 

2.  Twofold  Meaning  of  General  Names  .              .  .31 

3.  Abstract  Terms          .              .              .              .              .  .33 

4.  Substantial  Terms      .              »             .              .              .  .34 

5.  Collective  Terms        .              .              .              .              .  .35 

6.  Synthesis  of  Terms    .              .              .              .              .  .36 

7.  Symbolic  Expression  of  the  Law  of  Contradiction       .  .38 

8.  Certain  Special  Conditions  of  Logical  Symbols            r  .39 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  III. 

PROPOSITIONS. 

SECTION  PAGE 

1.  Propositions  .              .              .              .              .  .  .43 

2.  Simple  Identities       .              .              .              .  .  .44 

3.  Partial  Identities       .              .              .              .  .  .47 

4.  Limited  Identities     .              .              .              .  .  .51 

5.  Negative  Propositions             .              .              .  .  .52 

6.  Conversion  of  Propositions     .              .              .  .  .55 

7.  Twofold  Interpretation  of  Propositions            .  .  .57 

CHAPTER  IV. 

DEDUCTIVE    REASONING. 

1.  Deductive  Reasoning               .              .              .  .  .59 

2.  Immediate  Inference .              .              .              .  .  .60 

3.  Inference  with  Two  Simple  Identities              .  .  .61 

4.  Inference  with  a  Simple  and  a  Partial  Identity  .  .64 

5.  Inference  of  a  Partial  from  Two  Partial  Identities      .  .       66 

6.  On  the  Ellipsis  of  Terms  in  Partial  Identities  .  .69 

7.  Inference  of  a  Simple  from  Two  Partial  Identities       .  .       70 

8.  Inference  of  a  Limited  from  Two  Partial  Identities    .  .71 

9.  Miscellaneous  Forms  of  Deductive  Inference  .  .  .72 
10.  Fallacies        .              .              .              .              .  .  .74 

CHAPTER  V. 

DISJUNCTIVE    PROPOSITIONS. 

1.  Disjunctive  Propositions         .              .              .  .  .79 

2.  Expression  of  the  Alternative  Relation      .  .  .81 

3.  Nature  of  the  Alternative  Relation     .              .  .  .81 

4.  Laws  of  the  Disjunctive  Relation        .              .  .  .85 

5.  Symbolic  Expression  of  the  Law  of  Duality    .  .  .87 

6.  Various  Forms  of  the  Disjunctive  Proposition  .  .89 

7.  Inference  by  Disjunctive  Propositions             .  .  .90 

CHAPTER  VI. 

THE    INDIRECT    METHOD    OF    INFERENCE. 

1.  The  Indirect  Method  of  Inference       .              .  .  .95 

2.  Simple  Illustrations  .              .              .              .  .  .97 

3.  Employment  of  the  Contrapositive  Proposition  .  .       99 

4.  Contrapositive  of  a  Simple  Identity   .              .  .  .101 

5.  Miscellaneous  Examples  of  the  Method           .  .  .      103 

6.  Abbreviation  of  the  Process  .....     105 

7.  The  Logical  Abecedarium      .              .              .  .  10£ 

8.  The  Logical  Slate      .              .              .             .  .  .110 

9.  Abstraction  of  Indifferent  Circumstances         .  112 


CONTENTS.  xiii 


SECTION  PAGE 

10.  Illustrations  of  the  Indirect  Method  .              .              .  .113 

11.  Fallacies  analysed  by  the  Indirect  Method      .              .  .117 

12.  The  Logical  Abacus .              .              .              .              .  .119 

13.  The  Logical  Machine               .              .              .              .  .123 

14.  The  Order  of  Premises            .              .              .              .  .131 

15.  The  Equivalency  of  Propositions        .              .              .  .132 

16.  The  Nature  of  Inference         .              .              .              .  .136 

CHAPTER  VII. 

INDUCTION. 

1.  Induction       .              .              .              .              .              .  .139 

2.  Induction  an  Inverse  Operation          .              .              .  .140 

3.  Induction  of  Simple  Identities             .              .              .  .146 

4.  Induction  of  Partial  Identities             .              .              .  .149 

5.  Complete  Solution  of  the  Inverse  or  Inductive  Logical  Pro 

blem            .              .              .              .              .              .  .154 

6.  The  Inverse  Logical  Problem  involving  Three  Terms  .      157 

7.  Distinction  between  Perfect  and  Imperfect  Induction  .     164 

8.  Transition  from  Perfect  to  Imperfect  Induction            .  .168 


BOOK  II. 

NUMBER,    VARIETY,    AND    PROBABILITY. 
CHAPTER  VIII. 

PRINCIPLES    OF    NUMBER. 

1.  Principles  of  Number  .  .  .  .  .172 

2.  The  Nature  of  Number          .  .  .  .  .175 

3.  Of  Numerical  Abstraction       .  .  .  .  .177 

4.  Concrete  and  Abstract  Numbers         .  .  .  .178 

5.  Analogy  of  Logical  and  Numerical  Terms  .  .  .180 

6.  Principle  of  Mathematical  Inference  .  .  .  .183 

7.  Reasoning  by  Inequalities      .  .  .  .  .186 

8.  Arithmetical  Reasoning          .  .  .  .  .188 

9.  Numerically  Definite  Reasoning          .  .  .  .190 

CHAPTER  IX. 

THE    VARIETY    OP    NATURE,    OR    THE    DOCTRINE    OP    COMBINATIONS 
AND    PERMUTATIONS. 

1.  The  Variety  of  Nature  .  .  .  .195 

2.  Distinction  of  Combinations  and  Permutations  .  .     200 

3.  Calculation  of  Number  of  Combinations  .  .  .     204 

4.  The  Arithmetical  Triangle     .  .  .  .  .206 


xiv  CONTENTS. 


SECTION  PAGE 

5.  Connexion    between    the    Arithmetical     Triangle    and    the 

Logical  Abecedarium  .  .  .  .  .214 

6.  Possible  Variety  of  Nature  and  Art    .  .  .  .216 

7.  Higher  Orders  of  Variety       .  .  .  .  .219 

CHAPTER  X. 

THEORY    OF    PROBABILITY. 

1.  Theory  of  Probability              .              .              .              .  .224 

2.  Fundamental  Principles  of  the  Theory             .              .  .     228 

3.  Rules  for  the  Calculation  of  Probabilities        .              .  .231 

4.  Employment   of  the    Logical   Abecedarium    in  questions  of 

Probability  .  .  .  .  .  .234 

5.  Comparison  of  the  Theory  with  Experience    .  .  .     236 

6.  Probable  Deductive  Arguments          ....     239 

7.  Difficulties  of  the  Theory       .  .  .  .  .243 

CHAPTER  XL 

PHILOSOPHY    OF    INDUCTIVE    INFERENCE. 

1.  Philosophy  of  Inductive  Inference      ....     250 

2.  Various  Classes  of  Inductive  Truths  .  .              .              .251 

3.  The  Relation  of  Cause  and  Eifect       ....     253 

4.  Fallacious  Use  of  the  Term  Cause      .  .             .             .254 

5.  Confusion  of  Two  Questions  .  .             .             .             .256 

6.  Definition  of  the  Term  Cause  ....     257 

7.  Distinction  of  Inductive  and  Deductive  Results  .              .260 

8.  On  the  Grounds  of  Inductive  Inference  .              .              .262 

9.  Illustrations  of  the  Inductive  Process  .              .              .263 

10.  Geometrical  Reasoning  .  .  .  .  .268 

11.  Discrimination  of  Certainty  and  Probability  in  the  Inductive 

Process       .......     271 

CHAPTER  XII. 

THE   INDUCTIVE   OR    INVERSE   APPLICATION    OF    THE   THEORY 
OF   PROBABILITIES. 

1.  The   Inductive   or    Inverse   Application    of    the   Theory   of 

Probabilities         .             .             .             .             .  .276 

2.  Principle  of  the  Inverse  Method         .             .             .  .279 

3.  Simple  Applications  of  the  Inverse  Method     .              .  .281 

4.  Application  of  the  Theory  of  Probabilities  in  Astronomy  .     285 

5.  Statement  of  the  General  Inverse  Problem     .             .  .289 

6.  Simple  Illustration  of  the  Inverse  Problem    .             .  .292 

7.  General  Solution  of  the  Inverse  Problem        .             .  .     295 

8.  Rules  of  the  Inverse  Method               .             .             .  .297 

9.  Fortuitous  Coincidences         .....     302 
10.  Summary  of  the  Theory  of  Inductive  Inference           .  .     307 


CONTENTS.  xv 


BOOK   III. 

METHODS   OF   MEASUREMENT. 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

THE   EXACT    MEASUREMENT   OF    PHENOMENA. 

SECTION  PAGE 

1.  The  Exact  Measurement  of  Phenomena           .             .  .313 

2.  Division  of  the  Subject           .              .              .              .  .318 

3.  Continuous  Quantity               .              .              .              .  .318 

4.  The  Fallacious  Indications  of  the  Senses         .              .  .320 

5.  Complexity  of  Quantitative  Questions              .              .  .323 

6.  The  Methods  of  Accurate  Measurement           .             .  ,     328 

7.  Conditions  of  Accurate  Measurement              .             .  .     328 

8.  Measuring  Instruments           .              .              .              .  .330 

9.  The  Method  of  Repetition      .  ...     336 

10.  Measurements  by  Natural  Coincidence             .              .  .341 

11.  Modes  of  Indirect  Measurement  ....     345 

12.  Comparative  Use  of  Measuring  Instruments   .              .  .349 

13.  Systematic  Performance  of  Measurements        .             .  .351 

14.  The  Pendulum            .              .              .              .              .  .352 

15.  Attainable  Accuracy  of  Measurement              .             .  .354 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

UNITS   AND    STANDARDS   OP  MEASUREMENT. 

1.  Units  and  Standards  of  Measurement             .             .  .357 

2.  Standard  Unit  of  Time           .              .              .              .  .359 

3.  The  Unit  of  Space  and  the  Bar  Standard        .             .  .365 

4.  The  Terrestrial  Standard        .              .              .              .  .367 

5.  The  Pendulum  Standard         .....     369 

6.  Unit  of  Density          .             .             .             .             .  .371 

7.  Unit  of  Mass               .              .              .              .              .  .372 

8.  Subsidiary  Units       ......     374 

9.  Derived  Units            .              .              .              .              .  .375 

10.  Provisionally  Independent  Units        .             .             .  .377 

11.  Natural  Constants  and  Numbers        ....     380 

12.  Mathematical  Constants         .             .             .             .  .381 

13.  Physical  Constants     .              .              .              .              .  .383 

14.  Astronomical  Constants         .             .             .             .  .384 

15.  Terrestrial  Numbers               .             .             .             .  .385 

16.  Organic  Numbers      .              .                            .              .  .     385 

17.  Social  Numbers         .              .              .              .              .  .386 

CHAPTER  XV. 

ANALYSIS   OF   QUANTITATIVE   PHENOMENA. 

1.  Analysis  of  Quantitative  Phenomena  .             .             .  .387 

2.  Illustrations  of  the  Complication  of  Effects    .              .  .388 

3.  Methods  of  Eliminating  Error             .              .              .  .391 


xvi  CONTENTS. 


SECTION  PAGE 

4.  Method  of  Avoidance  of  Error  ....     393 

5.  Differential  Method  .  .  .  .  .  .398 

6.  Method  of  Correction  .....     400 

7.  Method  of  Compensation        .....     406 

8.  Method  of  Reversal   .  .  .  .  .410 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

THE    METHOD    OF    MEANS. 

1.  The  Method  of  Means  .  .  .  .  .414 

2.  Several  Uses  of  the  Mean  Result        .  .  .  .416 

3.  The  Significations  of  the  Terms  Mean  and  Average  .  .418 

4.  On  the  Fictitious  Mean  or  Average  Result     .  .  .422 

5.  The  Precise  Mean  Result        .  .  .  .  .424 

6.  Determination  of  the  Zero  Point  by  the  Method  of  Means       .     428 

7.  Determination  of  Maximum  Points     .  .  .  .431 

CHAPTER  XVII. 

THE    LAW    OF    ERROR. 

1.  The  Law  of  Error     ....  .434 

2.  Establishment  of  the  Law  of  Error     ....     435 

3.  Herschel's  Geometrical  Proof  .  .  .437 

4.  Laplace's  and  Quetelet's  Proof  of  the  Law  of  Error    .  .      438 

5.  Derivation  of  the  Law  of  Error  from  Simple  Logical  Prin 

ciples          .......     443 

6.  Verification  of  the  Law  of  Error         .  .     444 

7.  Remarks  on  the  General  Law  of  Error  .  .447 

8.  The  Probable  Mean  Result  as  defined  by  the  Law  of  Error     .     447 

9.  Weighted  Observations  .  .  .449 

10.  The  Probable  Error  of  Mean  Results  .     451 

11.  The  Rejection  of  the  Mean  Result      .  .     454 

12.  Method  of  Least  Squares        .  .458 

13.  Works  upon  the  Theory  of  Probability  and  the  Law  of  Error     459 

14.  Detection  of  Constant  Errors  .  .  .     460 


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE, 


CHAPTEE   I. 

INTRODUCTION. 

SCIENCE  arises  from  the  discovery  of  Identity  amid 
Diversity.  The  process  may  be  described  in  many  dif 
ferent  words,  but  our  language  must  always  imply  the 
presence  of  one  common  and  necessary  element.  In 
every  act  of  inference  or  scientific  method  we  are  engaged 
about  a  certain  identity,  sameness,  similarity,  likeness, 
resemblance,  analogy,  equivalence  or  equality  apparent 
between  two  objects.  It  is  doubtful  whether  an  entirely 
isolated  phenomenon  could  present  itself  to  our  notice, 
since  there  must  always  be  a  contrast  between  object 
and  object  to  awaken  our  consciousness.  But  in  any 
case  an  isolated  phenomenon  could  be  studied  to  no 
useful  purpose.  The  whole  value  of  science  consists  in 
the  power  which  it  confers  upon  us  of  applying  to  one 
object  the  knowledge  acquired  from  like  objects ;  and  it 
is  only  so  far,  therefore,  as  we  can  discover  and  register 
resemblances  or  differences  that  we  can  turn  our  obser 
vations  to  account. 

Nature  is  a  spectacle  continually  exhibited  to  our 
senses,  in  which  phenomena  are  mingled  in  combina 
tions  of  endless  variety  and  novelty.  Wonder  fixes  the 
mind's  attention;  memory  stores  up  a  record  of  each 

B 


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 


distinct  impression  ;  the  powers  of  association  bring  forth 
the  record  when  the  like  is  felt  again.  By  the  higher 
faculties  of  judgment  and  reasoning  the  mind  compares 
the  new  with  the  old,  recognises  essential  identity,  even 
when  disguised  by  diverse  circumstances,  and  expects  to 
find  again  what  was  before  experienced.  It  must  be  the 
ground  of  all  reasoning  and  inference  that  what  is  true 
of  one  thing  will  be  true  of  its  equivalent,  and  that  under 
carefully  ascertained  conditions  Nature  repeats  herself. 

Were  this  indeed  a  Chaotic  Universe,  the  powers  of 
mind  employed  in  science  would  be  useless  to  us.  Did 
Chance  wholly  take  the  place  of  order,  and  did  all  phe 
nomena  come  out,  not  of  one  same  Infinite  Lottery,  to 
use  Condorcet's  expression,  but  out  of  lotteries  ever 
changing  in  their  conditions,  there  could  be  no  reason  to 
expect  the  like  result  in  like  circumstances.  It  is  possible 
to  conceive  a  world  in  which  no  two  things  should  be 

O 

associated  more  often,  in  the  long  run,  than  any  other 
two  things.  The  frequent  conjunction  of  any  two  events 
would  then  be  purely  fortuitous,  and  if  we  expected 
conjunctions  to  recur  continually  we  should  be  disap 
pointed.  In  such  a  world  we  might  recognise  the  same 
phenomenon  as  it  appeared  from  time  to  time,  just  as  we 
might  recognise  a  marked  ball  as  it  was  occasionally 
drawn  from  a  ballot-box  ;  but  the  approach  of  any  one 
phenomenon  would  be  in  no  way  indicated  by  what  had 
gone  before,  nor  would  it  be  at  all  a  sign  of  what  was  to 
come  after.  In  such  a  world  knowledge  would  be  no 
more  than  the  memory  of  past  coincidences,  and  the 
reasoning  powers,  if  they  existed  at  all,  would  give  no 
clue  to  the  nature  of  the  present,  and  no  presage  of  the 
future. 

Happily  the  Universe  in  which  we  dwell  is  not  the 
result  of  chance,  and  where  chance  seems  to  work  it  is 
our  own  deficient  faculties  which  prevent  us  from  recog- 


INTRODUCTION. 


nising  the  operation  of  Law  and  of  Design.  In  the 
material  framework  of  this  world,  substances  and  forces 
present  themselves  in  definite  and  stable  combinations. 
All  things  are  not  in  perpetual  flux,  as  ancient  philoso 
phers  held.  Element  remains  element ;  iron  changes  not 
into  gold,  nor  oxygen  into  hydrogen.  With  suitable  pre 
cautions  we  can  calculate  upon  finding  the  same  thing 
again  endowed  with  the  same  properties.  The  con 
stituents  of  the  globe,  indeed,  appear  in  almost  endless 
combinations  ;  but  each  combination  bears  its  fixed  cha 
racter,  and  when  resolved  is  found  to  be  the  compound  of 
definite  substances.  Misapprehensions  must  continually 
occur,  owing  to  the  limited  extent  of  our  experience. 
We  can  never  have  examined  and  registered  possible  ex 
istences  so  thoroughly  as  to  be  sure  that  no  new  ones  will 
occur  and  frustrate  our  calculations.  The  same  outward 
appearances  may  cover  any  amount  of  hidden  differences 
which  we  have  not  yet  suspected.  To  the  variety  of 
substances  and  powers  diffused  through  nature  at  its 
creation,  we  must  not  suppose  that  our  brief  experience 
can  assign  a  limit ;  and  the  necessary  imperfection  of  our 
knowledge  should  be  ever  borne  in  mind. 

Yet  there  is  much  to  give  us  confidence  in  science. 
The  wider  our  experience,  the  more  minute  our  examina 
tion  of  the  globe,  the  greater  the  accumulation  of  well- 
reasoned  knowledge, — the  fewer  must  become  the  failures 
of  inference  compared  with  the  successes.  Exceptions  to 
the  prevalence  of  Law  are  gradually  reduced  to  Law 
themselves.  Certain  deep  similarities  have  been  detected 
among  the  objects  around  us,  and  have  never  yet  been 
found  wanting.  As  the  means  of  examining  distant  parts 
of  the  universe  have  been  acquired,  those  similarities  have 
been  traced  there  as  here.  Other  worlds  and  stellar 
systems  may  be  almost  incomprehensively  different  from 
ours  in  magnitude,  condition  and  disposition  of  parts,  and 

B  2 


THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 


yet  we  detect  there  the  same  elements  of  which  our 
own  limbs  are  composed.  The  same  natural  laws  can  be 
detected  in  operation  in  every  part  of  the  universe  within 
the  scope  of  our  instruments  ;  and  doubtless  these  laws  are 
obeyed  irrespective  of  distance,  time  and  circumstance. 

It  is  the  prerogative  of  Intellect  to  discover  what  is 
uniform  and  unchanging  in  the  phenomena  around  us. 
So  far  as  object  is  different  from  object,  knowledge  is 
useless  and  inference  impossible.  But  so  far  as  object 
resembles  object,  we  can  pass  from  one  to  the  other.  In 
proportion  as  resemblance  is  deeper  and  more  general,  the 
commanding  powers  of  knowledge  become  more  wonder 
ful.  Identity  in  one  or  other  of  its  phases  is  thus  always 
the  bridge  by  which  we  pass  in  inference  from  case  to 
case  ;  and  it  is  my  purpose  in  this  treatise  to  trace  out  the 
various  forms  in  which  the  one  same  process  of  reasoning 
presents  itself  in  the  ever-growing  achievements  of 
Scientific  Method. 

The  Powers  of  Mind  concerned  in  the  Creation  of 

Science. 

It  is  no  part  of  the  purpose  of  this  work  to  investigate 
the  nature  of  mind,  except  so  far  as  its  powers  are 
requisite  to  the  formation  of  Science.  In  this  place  I 
need  only  point  out  that  the  mental  powers  engaged  in 
knowledge  are  probably  three  in  number.  They  are 
substantially  as  Mr.  Bain  has  stated  thema  :  — 

1 .  The  Power  of  Discrimination. 

2.  The  Power  of  Detecting  Identity. 

3.  The  Power  of  Eetention. 

We  exert  the  first  power  in  every  act  of  perception. 
Hardly  can  we  have  a  sensation  or  feeling  unless  we 
discriminate  it  from  something  else  which  preceded. 

a  'The  Senses  and  the  Intellect,'  Second  Ed.,  pp.  5,  325,  &c. 


INTRODUCTION. 


Consciousness  would  almost  seem  to  consist  in  the  break 
between  one  state  of  mind  and  the  next,  just  as  an 
induced  current  of  electricity  arises  from  the  beginning 
or  the  ending  of  the  primary  current.  We  are  always 
engaged  in  discrimination  ;  and  the  rudiment  of  thought 
which  exists  in  the  lower  animals  probably  consists  in 
their  power  of  feeling  difference  and  being  agitated  by 
its  occurrence. 

But  had  we  power  of  discrimination  only,  Science  could 
not  be  created.  To  know  that  one  feeling  differs  from 
another  gives  purely  negative  information.  It  cannot  teach 
us  what  will  happen.  Each  sensation  would  stand  out  dis 
tinct  from  any  other,  and  there  would  be  no  tie,  no  bridge 
of  affinity  between  them.  We  want  a  unifying  power  by 
which  the  present  and  the  future  may  be  linked  to  the 
past ;  and  this  seems  to  be  accomplished  by  a  different 
power  of  mind.  Francis  Bacon  has  pointed  out  that  dif 
ferent  men  possess  in  very  different  degrees  the  powers  of 
discrimination  and  identification.  It  may  be  said  indeed 
that  discrimination  necessarily  implies  the  opposite  process 
of  identification  ;  and  so  it  doubtless  does  in  superficial 
points.  But  there  is  a  rare  property  of  mind  which 
consists  in  penetrating  the  disguise  of  variety  and  seizing 
the  common  elements  of  sameness  ;  and  it  is  this  pro 
perty  which  furnishes  the  true  measure  of  intellect.  The 
very  name  of  intellect  (interligo)  expresses  the  action,  not 
of  separating,  but  of  uniting  and  binding  together  the 
particular  and  various  into  the  general  and  like.  Logic 
is  but  another  name  for  the  same  process b,  the  peculiar 
work  of  reason ;  and  Plato  said  of  this  unifying  power, 
that  if  he  met  the  man  who  could  detect  the  one  in  the 
many,  he  would  follow  him  as  a  god. 

b  Max  Miiller,  '  Lectures  on  Language,'  Second  Series,  vol.  ii.  p.  63. 


THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 


Laws  of  Identity  and  Difference. 

At  the  basis  of  all  thought  and  science  must  lie  the 
laws  which  express  the  very  nature  and  conditions  of  the 
discriminating  and  identifying  powers  of  mind.  These 
are  the  so-called  Fundamental  Laws  of  Thought,  usually 
stated  as  follows  : — 

1 .  The  Law  of  Identity.     Whatever  is,  is. 

2.  The  Law  of  Contradiction.     A  thing  cannot  both  be 

and  not  be.  ± 

3.  The   Law  of  Duality.     A  thing  must  either  be  or 

not  be. 

The  first  of  these  statements  may  perhaps  be  regarded 
as  a  description  of  identity  itself,  if  so  fundamental  a 
notion  can  admit  of  description.  A  thing  at  any  moment 
is  perfectly  identical  with  itself,  and  if  any  person  were 
unaware  of  the  meaning  of  the  word  '  identity'  we  could 
not  better  describe  it  than  by  such  an  example. 

The  second  law  points  out  that  contradictory  attri 
butes  can  never  be  joined  together.  The  same  object  may 
vary  in  its  different  parts ;  here  it  may  be  black,  and 
there  white ;  at  one  time  it  may  be  hard  and  at  another 
time  soft :  but  at  the  same  time  and  place  an  attribute 
cannot  be  both  present  and  absent.  Aristotle  truly 
described  this  law  as  the  first  of  all  axioms0 — one  of 
which  we  need  not  seek  for  any  demonstration.  All 
truths  cannot  be  proved,  otherwise  there  would  be  an 
endless  chain  of  demonstration ;  and  it  is  in  self-evident 
truths  like  this  that  we  find  the  fittest  foundation. 

The  third  of  these  laws  completes  the  other  two.  It 
asserts  that  at  every  step  there  are  two  possible  alter 
natives — presence  or  absence,  affirmation  or  negation. 
Hence  I  propose  to  name  this  law  the  Law  of  Duality, 

c  'Metaphysics,'  Bk.  III.  chap.  iii.  9-12, 


INTRODUCTION. 


for  it  gives  to  all  the  formulae  of  reasoning  a  dual 
character.  It  asserts  also  that  between  presence  or 
absence,  existence  or  non-existence,  affirmation  or  ne 
gation,  there  is  no  third  alternative.  As  Aristotle  said, 
there  can  be  no  mean  between  opposite  assertions  :  we 
must  either  affirm  or  deny.  Hence  the  somewhat  incon 
venient  name  by  which  it  has  been  generally  known — 
The  Law  of  Excluded  Middle. 

It  may  be  held  that  these  laws  are  not  three  inde 
pendent  and  distinct  laws,  they  rather  express  three 
different  aspects  of  the  same  truth,  and  each  law  doubt 
less  presupposes  and  implies  the  other  two.  But  it  has 
not  hitherto  been  found  possible  to  state  these  characters 
of  identity  and  difference  in  less  than  the  three-fold 
formula.  The  reader  may  perhaps  desire  some  infor 
mation  as  to  the  mode  in  which  these  laws  have  been 
stated,  or  the  way  in  which  they  have  been  regarded, 
by  philosophers  in  different  ages  of  the  world.  Abundant 
information  on  this  and  many  other  points  of  logical 
history  will  be  found  in  Ueberweg's  '  System  of  Logic/ 
of  which  an  excellent  translation  has  been  published  by 
Mr.  T.  M.  Lindsay d.  I  must  confess  however  that  the 
history  of  logical  doctrines  has  seemed  to  me  one  of  the 
most  confusing  and  least  beneficial  studies  in  which  a 
person  can  engage  ;  and  over-abundant  attention  perhaps 
has  been  paid  to  it  by  Hamilton,  Mansel,  and  many 
German  logicians. 

The  Nature  and  Authority  of  the  Laws  of  Identity 
and  Difference. 

I  must  at  least  allude  to  the  profoundly  difficult 
question  concerning  the  nature  and  authority  of  these 

d  Ueberweg's  'System  of  Logic/  transl.  by  Lindsay,  London,  1871, 
pp.  228-281. 


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 


Laws  of  Identity  or  Difference.  Are  they  Laws  of  Thought 
or  Laws  of  Things  ?  Do  they  belong  to  mind  or  to 
material  nature  1  On  the  one  hand  it  may  be  said 
that  science  is  a  purely  mental  existence,  and  must 
therefore  conform  to  the  laws  of  that  which  formed  it. 
Science  is  in  the  mind  and  not  in  the  things,  and  the 
properties  of  mind  are  therefore  all  important.  It  is  true 
that  these  laws  are  verified  in  the  observation  of  the 
exterior  world ;  and  it  would  seem  that  they  might  have 
been  gathered  and  proved  by  generalisation,  had  they 
not  already  been  in  our  possession.  But  on  the  other 
hand,  it  may  well  be  urged  that  we  cannot  prove  these 
laws  by  any  process  of  reasoning  or  observation,  be 
cause  the  laws  themselves  are  presupposed,  as  Leibnitz 
acutely  remarked,  in  the  very  notion  of  a  proof.  They 
are  the  prior  conditions  of  all  thought  and  all  know 
ledge,  and  even  to  question  their  truth  is  to  allow 
them  true.  Hartley  ingeniously  refined  upon  this  argu 
ment,  remarking  that  if  the  fundamental  laws  of  logic 
be  not  certain,  there  must  exist  a  logic  of  a  second 
order  whereby  we  may  determine  the  degree  of  uncer 
tainty  :  if  the  second  logic  be  not  certain,  there  must 
be  a  third,  and  so  on  ad  infinitum.  Thus  we  must  sup 
pose  either  that  absolutely  certain  laws  of  thought  exist, 
or  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  certainty  whatever  e. 

Logicians,  indeed,  appear  to  me  to  have  paid  insuf 
ficient  attention  to  the  fact  that  mistakes  in  reasoning 
are  always  likely  to  occur.  The  Laws  of  Thought  are 
often  called  necessary  laws,  that  is,  laws  which  cannot 
but  be  obeyed.  Yet  as  a  matter  of  fact  who  is  there 
that  does  not  often  fail  to  obey  them  ?  They  are  the 
laws  which  the  mind  ought  to  obey  rather  than  what 
it  always  does  obey.  Our  thoughts  cannot  be  the 
criterion  of  truth,  for  we  often  have  to  acknowledge 

e    Hartley  on  Man,  vol.  i.  p.  359. 


INTRODUCTION. 


mistakes  in  arguments  of  very  moderate  complexity,  and 
we  sometimes  only  discover  our  mistakes  by  a  collision 
between  our  mental  expectations  and  the  events  of  ob 
jective  nature. 

Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  holds  that  the  laws  of  logic  are 
objective  lawsf,  and  he  regards  the  mind  as  being  in 
a  state  of  constant  education,  each  act  of  false  reasoning 
or  miscalculation  leading  to  results  which  are  likely  to 
prevent  similar  mistakes  from  being  again  committed. 
I  am  quite  inclined  to  accept  such  ingenious  views ;  but 
at  the  same  time  it  is  necessary  to  distinguish  between 
the  accumulation  of  knowledge  and  experience,  and  the 
constitution  of  the  mind  which  allows  of  the  acquisition 
of  knowledge.  Before  the  mind  can  perceive  or  reason 
at  all  it  must  have  the  conditions  of  thought  impressed 
upon  it.  Before  a  mistake  can  be  committed,  the  mind 
must  clearly  distinguish  tiie  mistaken  conclusion  from  all 
other  assertions.  Are  not  the  Laws  of  Identity  and 
Difference  the  prior  conditions  of  all  consciousness  and 
all  existence  \  Must  they  not  hold  true,  alike  of  things 
material  and  immaterial  \  and  if  so,  can  we  say  that 
they  are  only  subjectively  true  or  objectively  true  1  I 
am  inclined,  in  short,  to  regard  them  as  true  both  'in 
the  nature  of  thought  and  things,'  as  I  expressed  it  in 
my  first  logical  essay  s,  and  I  hold  that  they  belong  to 
the  common  basis  of  all  existence.  But  this  is  one  of 
the  most  profound  and  difficult  questions  of  psychology 
and  metaphysics  which  can  be  raised,  and  it  is  hardly 
one  for  the  logician  to  decide.  As  the  mathematician  does 
not  inquire  into  the  nature  of  unity  and  plurality,  but 
developes  the  formal  laws  of  plurality,  so  the  logician, 
as  I  conceive,  must  assume  the  truth  of  the  Laws  of 

f  '  Principles  of  Psychology,'  Second  Ed.,  vol.  ii.  p.  86. 
s  '  Pure  Logic,  or  the  Logic  of  Quality  apart  from  Quantity,'  London 
(Stanford),  1864,  pp.  10,  16,  22,  29,  36,  &c. 


10  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

Identity  and  Difference,  and  occupy  himself  in  developing 
the  variety  of  forms  of  reasoning  in  which  their  truth  may 
be  manifested. 

Again,  I  need  hardly  dwell  upon  the  question  whether 
logic  treats  of  language,  notions,  or  things.  As  reasonably 
might  we  debate  whether  a  mathematician  treats  of 
symbols,  quantities,  or  things.  A  mathematician  certainly 
does  treat  of  symbols,  but  only  as  the  instruments 
whereby  to  facilitate  his  reasoning  concerning  quantities ; 
and  as  the  axioms  and  rules  of  mathematical  science  must 
be  verified  in  concrete  objects  in  order  that  the  calcu 
lations  founded  upon  them  may  have  any  validity  or 
utility,  it  follows  that  the  ultimate  objects  of  mathe 
matical  science  are  the  things  themselves.  In  like  man 
ner  I  conceive  that  the  logician  treats  of  language  so  far 
as  it  is  essential  for  the  embodiment  and  exhibition  of 
thought.  Even  if  reasoning  can  take  place  in  the  inner 
consciousness  of  man  without  the  use  of  any  signs,  at 
any  rate  it  cannot  become  the  subject  of  discussion  until 
by  some  system  of  material  signs  it  is  manifested  to  other 
persons.  The  logician  then  uses  words  and  symbols  as 
instruments  of  reasoning,  and  leaves  the  nature  and  pe 
culiarities  of  existing  language  to  the  grammarian.  But 
signs  again  must  correspond  to  the  thoughts  and  things 
expressed,  in  order  that  they  shall  serve  their  intended 
purpose.  We  may  therefore  say  that  logic  treats  ulti 
mately  of  thoughts  and  things,  and  immediately  of  the 
signs  which  stand  for  them.  Signs,  thoughts  and  ex 
terior  objects  may  be  regarded  as  parallel  and  analogous 
series  of  phenomena,  and  to  treat  one  series  is  equivalent 
to  treating  either  of  the  other  series  h. 

h  See  also  'Elementary  Lessons  in  Logic/  Second  Ed.,  p.  10. 


INTRODUCTION.  \\ 


TJie  Process  of  Inference. 

The  fundamental  action  of  our  reasoning  faculties 
consists  in  inferring  or  carrying  to  a  new  instance  of  a 
phenomenon  whatever  we  have  previously  known  of  its 
like,  analogue,  equivalent  or  equal.  Sameness  or  identity 
presents  itself  in  all  degrees,  and  is  known  under  various 
names ;  but  the  great  rule  of  inference  embraces  all 
degrees,  and  affirms  that  so  far  as  there  exists  sameness, 
identity  or  likeness,  what  is  true  of  one  thing  will  be  true 
of  the  other.  The  great  difficulty  of  reasoning  doubtless 
consists  in  ascertaining  that  there  does  exist  a  sufficient 
degree  of  likeness  or  sameness  to  warrant  an  intended 
inference  ;  and  it  will  be  our  main  task  to  investigate  the 
conditions  under  which  the  inference  is  valid.  In  this 
place  I  wish  to  point  out  that  there  is  something  common 
to  all  acts  of  inference  however  different  their  apparent 
forms.  The  one  same  rule  lends  itself  to  the  most  diverse 
applications. 

The  simplest  possible  case  of  inference,  perhaps,  occurs 
in  the  use  of  a  pattern,  example,  or,  as  it  is  commonly 
called,  a  sample.  To  prove  the  exact  similarity  of  two 
portions  of  commodity,  we  need  not  bring  one  portion 
beside  the  other.  It  is  sufficient  that  we  cut  a  sample 
which  exactly  represents  the  texture,  appearance,  and 
general  nature  of  one  portion,  and  according  as  this 
sample  agrees  or  not  with  the  other,  so  will  the  two 
portions  of  commodity  agree  or  differ.  Whatever  is  true 
as  regards  the  colour,  texture,  density,  material  of  the 
sample  will  be  true  of  the  goods  themselves.  In  such 
cases  likeness  of  quality  is  the  condition  of  inference. 

Exactly  the  same  mode  of  reasoning  holds  true  of 
magnitude  and  figure.  To  compare  the  size  of  two 
objects,  we  need  not  lay  them  alongside  each  other.  A 


12  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

staff,  string,  or  other  kind  of  measure  may  be  employed 
to  represent  the  length  of  one  object,  and  according  as  it 
agrees  or  not  with  the  other,  so  must  the  two  objects 
agree  or  differ.  In  this  case  the  proxy  or  sample  repre 
sents  length ;  but  the  fact  that  lengths  can  be  added  and 
multiplied  renders  it  unnecessary  that  the  proxy  should 
always  be  as  large  as  the  object.  Any  standard  of  con 
venient  length,  such  as  a  common  foot-rule,  may  be  made 
the  medium  of  comparison.  The  height  of  a  church  in 
one  town  may  be  carried  to  that  in  another,  and  objects 
existing  immoveably  at  opposite  sides  of  the  earth  may  be 
vicariously  measured  against  each  other.  We  obviously 
employ  the  rule  that  whatever  is  true  of  a  thing  as 
regards  its  length,  is  true  of  its  equal. 

To  every  other  simple  phenomenon  in  nature  the  same 
principle  of  substitution  is  applicable.  We  may  compare 
weights  or  densities  or  degrees  of  hardness,  and  all  other 
qualities,  in  like  manner.  To  ascertain  whether  two 
sounds  are  in  unison  we  need  not  compare  them  directly, 
but  a  third  sound  may  be  the  go-between.  If  a  tuning- 
fork  is  in  unison  with  the  middle  C  of  York  Minster 
organ,  and  we  afterwards  find  it  to  be  in  unison  with  the 
same  note  of  the  organ  in  Westminster  Abbey,  then  it 
follows  that  the  two  organs  are  tuned  in  unison.  The 
rule  of  inference  now  is  that  what  is  true,  as  regards 
pitch,  of  the  tuning-fork,  is  true  of  any  sound  in  unison 
with  it. 

The  skilful  employment  of  this  substitutive  process 
enables  us  to  make  measurements  beyond  the  powers  of 
our  senses.  No  one  can  count  the  vibrations,  for  instance, 
of  an  organ  pipe.  But  we  can  construct  an  instrument 
called  the  syren,  so  that  while  producing  a  sound  of  any 
pitch  it  shall  register  the  number  of  vibrations  consti 
tuting  the  sound.  Adjusting  the  sound  of  the  syren  in 
unison  with  an  organ  pipe,  we  measure  indirectly  the 


INTRODUCTION.  13 


number  of  vibrations  belonging  to  a  sound  of  that  pitch. 
To  measure  a  sound  of  the  same  pitch  is  as  good  as  to 
measure  the  sound  itself. 

Sir  David  Brewster,  in  a  somewhat  similar  manner, 
succeeded  in  measuring  the  refractive  index  of  irregular 
fragments  of  transparent  minerals.  It  was  a  troublesome, 
and  sometimes  impracticable  work  to  grind  the  minerals 
into  prisms,  so  that  their  powers  of  refracting  light  could 
be  directly  observed  ;  but  he  fell  upon  the  ingenious  device 
of  forming  a  liquid  possessing  exactly  the  same  refractive 
power  as  the  transparent  fragment  under  examination. 
The  moment  when  this  equality  was  attained  could  be 
known  by  the  fragments  ceasing  to  reflect  or  refract  light 
when  immersed  in  the  liquid,  so  that  they  became  almost 
invisible  in  it.  The  refractive  power  of  the  liquid  being 
then  measured  gives  that  of  the  solid  ;  and  a  more  beau 
tiful  instance  of  representative  measurement,  depending 
immediately  upon  the  principle  of  inference,  could  not 
be  found*. 

Throughout  the  various  logical  processes  which  we  are 
about  to  consider — Deduction,  Induction,  Generalisation, 
Analogy,  Classification,  Quantitative  Reasoning — we  shall 
find  the  one  same  principle  operating  in  a  more  or  less 
disguised  form. 

Deduction  and  Induction. 

The  processes  of  inference  always  depend  on  the  one 
same  method  of  substitution  ;  but  they  may  nevertheless 
be  distinguished  according  as  the  results  are  inductive  or 
deductive.  As  generally  stated,  deduction  consists  in 

1  Brewster,  'Treatise  on  New  Philosophical  Instruments,'  p.  273. 
See  also  "Whewell,  '  Philosophy  of  the  Inductive  Sciences,'  vol.  ii.  p.  355  ; 
Tomlinson,  'Philosophical  Magazine,'  Fourth  Series,  vol.  xl.  p.  328; 
Tyndall,  in  Youman's  '  Modern  Culture/  p.  1 6. 


14  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

passing  from  more  general  to  less  general  truths ;  induc 
tion  is  the  contrary  process  from  less  to  more  general 
truths.  We  may  however  describe  the  difference  in 
another  manner.  In  deduction  we  are  engaged  in  develop 
ing  the  consequences  of  a  law  or  identity.  We  learn 
the  meaning,  contents,  results  or  inferences,  which  attach 
to  any  given  proposition.  Induction  is  the  exactly  inverse 
process.  Given  certain  results  or  consequences,  we  are  re 
quired  to  discover  the  general  law  from  which  they  flow. 

In  a  certain  sense  all  knowledge  is  inductive.  We  can 
only  learn  the  laws  and  relations  of  things  in  nature  by 
observing  those  things.  But  the  knowledge  gained  from 
the  senses  is  knowledge  only  of  particular  facts,  and  we 
require  some  process  of  reasoning  by  which  we  may  con 
struct  out  of  the  facts  the  laws  obeyed  by  them.  Expe 
rience  gives  us  the  materials  of  knowledge  :  induction 
digests  those  materials,  and  yields  us  general  knowledge. 
Only  when  we  possess  such  knowledge,  in  the  form  of 
general  propositions  and  natural  laws,  can  we  usefully 
apply  the  reverse  process  of  deduction  to  ascertain  the 
exact  information  required  at  any  moment.  In  its  ultimate 
origin  or  foundation,  then,  all  knowledge  is  inductive — in 
the  sense  that  it  is  derived  by  a  certain  inductive 
reasoning  from  the  facts  of  experience. 

But  it  is  nevertheless  true, — and  this  is  a  point  to 
which  insufficient  attention  has  been  paid, — that  all  reason 
ing  is  founded  on  the  principles  of  deduction.  I  call  in 
question  the  existence  of  any  method  of  reasoning  which 
can  be  carried  on  without  a  knowledge  of  deductive  pro 
cesses.  I  shall  endeavour  to  show  that  induction  is  really 
the  inverse  process  of  deduction.  There  is  no  mode  of 
ascertaining  the  laws  which  are  obeyed  in  certain  pheno 
mena,  except  we  previously  have  the  power  of  determining 
what  results  would  follow  from  a  given  law.  Just  as  the 
process  of  division  necessitates  a  prior  knowledge  of  multi- 


INTRODUCTION.  15 


plication,  or  the  integral  calculus  rests  upon  the  obser 
vation  and  remembrance  of  the  results  of  the  differential 
calculus,  so  induction  requires  a  prior  knowledge  of 
deduction.  An  inverse  process  is  the  undoing  of  the 
direct  process.  A  person  who  enters  a  maze  must  either 
trust  to  chance  to  lead  him  out  again,  or  he  must  carefully 
notice  the  road  by  which  he  entered.  The  facts  furnished 
to  us  by  experience  are  a  maze  of  particular  results  ;  we 
might  by  chance  observe  in  them  the  fulfilment  of  a  law, 
but  this  is  scarcely  possible,  unless  we  thoroughly  learn 
the  effects  which  would  attach  to  any  particular  law. 

Accordingly,  the  importance  of  deductive  reasoning  is 
doubly  supreme.  Even  when  we  gain  the  results  of  in 
duction  they  would  be  of  little  or  no  use  without  we 
could  deductively  apply  them.  But  before  we  can  gain 
them  at  all  we  must  understand  deduction,  since  it  is  the 
inversion  of  deduction  which  constitutes  induction.  Our 
first  task  then,  in  this  work,  must  be  to  trace  out  fully  the 
nature  of  identity  in  all  its  forms  of  occurrence.  Having 
given  any  series  of  propositions  we  must  be  prepared  to 
develop  the  whole  meaning  embodied  in  them,  and  the 
whole  of  the  consequences  which  flow  from  them. 

Symbolic  Expression  of  Logical  Inference. 

In  developing  the  results  of  the  Principle  of  Inference 
we  require  to  use  an  appropriate  language  of  signs.  It 
would  indeed  be  quite  possible  to  explain  the  processes  of 
reasoning  merely  by  the  use  of  words  found  in  the  ordinary 
grammar  and  dictionary.  Special  examples  of  reasoning, 
too,  may  seem  to  be  more  readily  apprehended  than  general 
and  symbolic  forms.  But  it  has  been  abundantly  proved 
in  the  mathematical  sciences  that  the  attainment  of  truth 
depends  greatly  upon  the  invention  of  a  clear,  brief,  and 
appropriate  system  of  symbols.  Not  only  is  such  a 


16  THE  PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

language  convenient,  but  it  is  essential  to  the  expression 
of  those  general  truths  which  are  the  very  soul  of  science. 
To  apprehend  the  truth  of  special  cases  of  inference  does 
not  constitute  logic  ;  we  must  apprehend  them  as  cases  of 
more  general  truths.  The  object  of  all  science  is  the 
separation  of  what  is  common  and  general  from  what  is 
accidental  and  different.  In  a  system  of  logic,  if  anywhere, 
we  should  esteem  this  generality,  and  strive  to  exhibit 
clearly  what  is  similar  in  very  diverse  cases.  Hence  the 
great  value  of  general  symbols  by  which  we  can  represent 
the  form  and  character  of  a  reasoning  process,  disentangled 
from  any  consideration  of  the  special  subject  to  which  it  is 
applied. 

The  signs  required  in  logic  are  of  a  very  simple  kind. 
As  every  sameness  or  difference  must  exist  between  two 
things  or  notions,  we  need  signs  or  terms  to  indicate  the 
things  or  notions  compared,  and  other  signs  to  denote  the 
relation  between  them.  We  shall  need,  then,  (i)  symbols 
for  terms,  (2)  a  symbol  for  sameness,  (3)  a  symbol  for  differ 
ence,  and  (4)  one  or  two  symbols  to  take  the  place  of 
conjunctions. 

Ordinary  nouns  substantive,  such  as  Iron,  Metal,  Elec 
tricity,  Undulation,  might  serve  as  terms,  but  for  the 
reasons  explained  above  it  is  better  to  adopt  blank  letters, 
devoid  of  special  signification,  such  as  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  &c. 
Each  letter  must  be  understood  to  represent  a  noun,  and, 
so  far  as  the  conditions  of  the  argument  allow,  any  noun. 
Just  as  in  Algebra,  x,  y,  z,  p,  q,  r,  &c.  are  used  for  any 
quantities,  undetermined  or  unknown,  except  when  the 
special  conditions  of  the  problem  are  taken  into  account, 
so  will  our  letters  stand  for  undetermined  or  unknown 
things. 

These  letter-terms  will  be  used  indifferently  for  nouns 
substantive  and  adjective.  Between  these  two  kinds  of 
nouns  there  may  be  important  differences  in  a  metaphysical 


INTRODUCTION.  17 


or  grammatical  point  of  view.  But  grammatical  usage 
readily  sanctions  the  free  conversion  of  adjectives  into 
substantives,  and  vice  versd ;  we  may  avail  ourselves  of 
this  latitude  without  in  any  way  prejudging  the  meta 
physical  difficulties  which  may  be  involved.  Here,  as 
throughout  this  work,  I  shall  devote  my  attention  to 
truths  which  I  can  exhibit  in  a  clear  and  formal  manner, 
believing  that,  in  the  present  condition  of  logical  science, 
this  will  lead  to  much  greater  advantage  than  discussion 
upon  the  metaphysical  questions  which  may  underlie  any 
part  of  the  subject. 

Every  noun  or  term  denotes  an  object,  and  usually  im 
plies  the  possession  by  that  object  of  certain  qualities  or 
circumstances  common  to  all  the  objects  denoted.  There 
are  certain  terms,  however,  which  imply  the  absence  of 
qualities  or  circumstances  attaching  to  other  objects.  It 
will  be  convenient  to  employ  a  special  mode  of  indicating 
these  negative  terms,  as  they  are  called.  If  the  general 
name  A  denotes  an  object  or  class  of  objects  possessing 
certain  defined  qualities,  then  the  term  Not-A  will  denote 
any  object  which  does  not  possess  the  whole  of  those 
qualities ;  in  short,  Not-A  is  the  sign  for  anything  which 
differs  from  A  in  regard  to  any  one  or  more  of  the  assigned 
qualities.  If  A  denote  '  transparent  object,'  Not-A  will 
denote  '  not  transparent  object.'  Brevity  and  facility  of 
writing  and  reading  are  of  no  slight  importance  in  a  system 
of  notation,  and  it  will  therefore  be  desirable  to  substitute 
for  the  negative  term  Not-A  a  briefer  mode  of  expression. 
The  late  Prof,  de  Morgan  represented  negative  terms  by 
small  Eoman  letters,  or  sometimes  by  small  italic  letters  k, 
and  as  the  latter  seem  to  be  highly  convenient,  I  shall  use 
a,  6,  c,  d,  e,  .  .  .  p,  q,  r,  &c.,  as  the  negative  terms  corre 
sponding  to  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  .  .  .  P,  Q,  R,  &c.  Thus  if  A 
means  '  fluid,'  a  will  mean  '  not-fluid/  and  so  on. 

k  'Formal  Logic,'  p.  38. 
C 


18  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 


Expression  of  Identity  and  Difference. 

To  denote  the  relation  of  sameness  or  identity  I  unhesi 
tatingly  adopt  the  sign  = ,  so  long  used  by  mathematicians 
to  denote  equality.  This  symbol  was  originally  appropri 
ated  by  Robert  Recorde  in  his  'Whetstone  of  Wit/  to 
avoid  the  tedious  repetition  of  the  words  'is  equal  to'; 
and  he  chose  a  pair  of  parallel  lines,  because  no  two  things 
can  be  more  equal l.  The  meaning  of  the  sign  has  how 
ever  been  gradually  extended  beyond  that  of  common 
equality ;  mathematicians  have  themselves  used  it  to 
indicate  equivalency  of  operations.  The  force  of  analogy 
has  been  so  great  that  writers  in  all  other  branches  of 
science  have  more  or  less  employed  the  same  sign.  The 
philologist  indicates  by  it  equivalency  of  meaning  of  words  : 
chemists  adopt  it  to  signify  the  identity  in  kind  and 
equality  in  weight  of  the  elements  which  form  two  different 
compounds.  Not  a  few  logicians,  for  instance  Ploucquet, 
Condillacm,  George  Benthamn,  Boole,  have  employed  it 
as  the  copula  of  propositions.  Prof,  de  Morgan  declined 
to  use  it  for  this  purpose,  but  still  further  extended  its 
meaning  so  as  to  include  the  equivalency  of  a  proposition 
with  the  premises  from  which  it  can  be  inferred  °,  and 
Herbert  Spencer  has  applied  it  in  a  like  manner  P. 

Many  persons  may  think  that  the  choice  of  a  symbol  is 
a  matter  of  slight  importance  or  of  mere  convenience,  but 
I  hold  that  the  common  use  of  this  sign  =  in  so  many 
different  meanings  is  really  founded  upon  a  generalisation 

1  Hallam's  'Literature  of  Europe,'  First  Ed.  vol.  ii.  p.  444, 
m  Condillac,  '  Langue  des  Calculs/  p.  157. 

n  'Outline  of  a  New  System  of  Logic/  London,  1827,  pp.  133,  &c. 
o  'Formal  Logic,'  pp.  82,  106.     In  his  later  work,  'The  Syllabus  of  a 
New  System  of  Logic,'  he  discontinued  the  use  of  the  sign. 
P  '  Principles  of  Psychology,'  Second  Ed.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  54,  55. 


INTRODUCTION.  19 


of  the  widest  character  and  of  the  greatest  importance — 
one  indeed  which  it  is  a  principal  object  of  this  work  to 
endeavour  to  explain.  The  employment  of  the  same  sign 
in  different  cases  would  be  wholly  unphilosophical  unless 
there  were  some  real  analogy  between  its  diverse  meanings. 
If  such  analogy  exist,  it  is  not  only  allowable,  but  highly 
desirable  and  even  imperative,  to  use  the  symbol  of  equi 
valency  with  a  generality  of  meaning  corresponding  to  the 
generality  of  the  principles  involved.  Accordingly  Prof, 
de  Morgan's  refusal  to  use  the  symbol  in  logical  proposi 
tions  indicated  his  opinion  that  there  was  a  want  of  analogy 
between  logical  propositions  and  mathematical  equations. 
I  use  the  sign  because  I  hold  the  contrary  opinion. 

I  conceive  that  the  sign  =  always  denotes  some  form 
or  degree  of  sameness  or  equivalency,  and  the  particular 
form  is  usually  indicated  by  the  nature  of  the  terms  joined 
by  it.  Thus  '6720  pounds  =  3  tons'  is  evidently  a.n 
equation  of  quantities.  The  formula  —  x  —  =  +  ex 
presses  the  equivalency  of  operations.  '  Exogens  —  Dico 
tyledons  '  is  a  logical  identity  expressing  a  profound 
truth  concerning  the  character  of  vegetables. 

We  have  great  need  in  logic  of  a  distinct  sign  for  the 
copula,  because  the  little  verb  is,  hitherto  used  both  in 
logic  and  ordinary  discourse,  is  thoroughly  ambiguous. 
It  sometimes  denotes  identity,  as  in  '  St.  Paul's  is  the 
chef-d'oeuvre  of  Sir  Christopher  Wren/  but  it  more 
commonly  indicates  inclusion  of  class  within  class,  or 
partial  identity,  as  in  'Bishops  are  members  of  the  House 
of  Lords.'  This  latter  relation  involves  identity,  but  re 
quires  careful  discrimination  from  simple  identity,  as  will 
be  shown  further  on. 

When  with  this  sign  of  equality  we  join  two  nouns  or 
logical  terms,  as  in 

Hydrogen  =  The  least  dense  element, 
we  signify  that  the  object  or  group  of  objects  denoted  by 

c  2 


20  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

one  term  is  identical  with  that  denoted  by  the  other  in 
everything  except  the  names.  The  general  formula 

A  =  B 

must  be  taken  to  mean  that  A  and  B  are  symbols  for  the 
same  object  or  group  of  objects.  This  identity  may  some 
times  arise  from  the  mere  imposition  of  names,  but  it 
may  also  arise  from  the  deepest  laws  of  the  constitution 
of  nature  ;  as  when  we  say 

Gravitating  matter  =  Matter  possessing  inertia, 
Exogenous  plants  =  Dicotyledonous  plants, 
Plagihedral  quartz  cry  stale  =  Quartz  crystals  rotating 

the  plane  of  polarisation  of  light. 

We  shall  need  carefully  to  distinguish  between  relations 
of  terms  which  can  be  modified  at  our  own  will  and  those 
which  are  fixed  as  expressing  the  laws  of  nature ;  but  at 
present  we  are  considering  only  the  mode  of  expression. 

We  may  sometimes,  but  much  less  frequently,  require  a 
symbol  to  indicate  difference  or  the  absence  of  complete 
sameness.  For  this  purpose  we  may  generalise  in  like 
manner  the  symbol  -*• ,  which  was  introduced  by  Wallis  to 
signify  difference  between  two  numbers  or  quantities. 
The  general  formula 

B  -  C 

denotes  that  B  and  C  are  the  names  of  some  two  objects 
or  groups  of  objects  which  are  not  identical  with  each 
other.  Thus  we  may  say 

Acrogens  *  Flowering  plants. 

SnowTdon  *»  The  highest  mountain  in  Great  Britain. 
I  shall  also  occasionally  use  the  sign  «»  to  signify  in  the 
most  general  manner  the  existence  of  any  relation  between 
the  two  terms  connected  by  it.  Thus  «»  might  mean  not 
only  the  relations  of  equality  or  inequality,  sameness  or 
difference,  but  any  special  relation  of  time,  place,  size, 
causation,  &c.  in  which  one  thing  may  stand  to  another. 
By  A  «o*  B  I  mean,  then,  any  two  objects  of  thought  re 
lated  to  each  other  in  any  matter  whatsoever. 


INTRODUCTION.  21 


General  Formula  of  Logical  Inference. 

The  one  supreme  rule  of  inference  consists,  as  I  have 
said,  in  the  direction  to  affirm  of  anything  whatever  is 
known  of  its  like,  equal  or  equivalent.  The  Substitution 
of  Similars  is  a  phrase  which  seems  aptly  to  express  the 
power  of  mutual  replacement  existing  between  any  two 
objects  which  are  to  a  sufficient  degree  like  or  equivalent. 
It  is  a  matter  for  further  investigation  to  point  out  when 
and  for  what  purposes  a  degree  of  similarity  less  than 
complete  identity  is  sufficient  to  warrant  substitution. 
For  the  present  we  think  only  of  the  exact  sameness 
expressed  in  the  form 

A  =  B. 

Now  if  we  take  the  letter  C  to  denote  any  third  con 
ceivable  object,  and  use  the  sign  <**  in  its  stated  meaning 
of  indefinite  relation,  then  the  general  formula  of  all 
inference  may  be  thus  exhibited  : — 

From  A  =  B  «»  C 

we  may  infer  A  *»  C 

or,  in  words — In  ivhatever  relation  a  thing  stands  to  a 
second  thing,  in  the  same  relation  it  stands  to  the  like  or 
equivalent  of  that  second  thing.  The  identity  between  A 
and  B  allows  us  indifferently  to  place  A  where  B  was  or 
B  where  A  was,  and  there  is  no  limit  to  the  variety  of 
special  meanings  which  we  can  bestow  upon  the  signs 
used  in  this  formula  consistently  with  its  truth.  Thus  if 
we  first  specify  only  the  meaning  of  the  sign  «o»,  we  may 
say  that  if  C  is  the  weight  of  B,  then  C  is  also  the  weight 
of  A.  Similarly 

If  C  is  the  father  of  B,  C  is  the  father  of  A  ; 

If  C  is  a  fragment  of  B,  C  is  a  fragment  of  A  ; 

If  C  is  a  quality  of  B,  C  is  a  quality  of  A  ; 

If  C  is  a  species  of  B,  C  is  a  species  of  A  ; 

If  C  is  the  equal  of  B,  C  is  the  equal  of  A  ; 
and  so  on  ad  infinitum. 


22  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

We  may  also  endow  with  special  meanings  the  letter- 
terms  A,  B  and  C,  and  the  process  of  inference  will  never 
be  false.  Thus  let  the  sign  **  mean  'is  height  of,'  and 
let 

A  =  Snowdon, 

B  =  Highest  mountain  in  England  or  Wales, 
C  =  3590  feet; 

then  it  obviously  follows  that  since  '3590  feet  is  the 
height  of  Snowdon/  and  '  Snowdon  =  the  highest  mountain 
in  England  or  Wales/  then  '3590  feet  is  the  height  of  the 
highest  mountain  in  England  or  Wales/ 

One  result  of  this  general  process  of  inference  is  that 
we  may  in  any  aggregate  or  complex  whole  replace  any 
part  by  its  equivalent  without  altering  the  whole.  To 
alter  is  to  make  a  difference,  but  if  in  replacing  a  part  I 
make  no  difference,  there  is  no  alteration  of  the  whole. 
Many  inferences  which  have  been  very  imperfectly  in 
cluded  in  logical  formulae  at  once  follow.  I  remember  the 
late  Prof,  de  Morgan  remarking  that  all  Aristotle's  logic 
could  not  prove  that '  Because  a  horse  is  an  animal,  the 
head  of  a  horse  is  the  head  of  an  animal.'  I  conceive  that 
this  amounts  merely  to  replacing  in  the  complete  notion 
head  of  a  horse,  the  term  '  horse'  by  its  equivalent  some 
animal  or  an  animal.  Similarly,  since 

The  Lord  Chancellor  =  The  Speaker  of  the  House  of 

Lords, 
it  follows  that 

The  death  of  the  Lord  Chancellor  =  The  death  of  the 

Speaker  of  the  House  of  Lords  ; 

and  any  event,  circumstance  or  thing  which  stands  in  a 
certain  relation  to  the  one  will  stand  in  like  relation  to 
the  other.  Milton  reasons  in  this  way  when  he  says,  in 
his  Areopagitica,  *  Who  kills  a  man,  kills  a  reasonable  crea 
ture,  God's  image/  If  we  may  suppose  him  to  mean 

God's  image  =  man  =  some  reasonable  creature, 


INTRODUCTION.  23 


it  follows  that  '  The  killer  of  a  man  is  the  killer  of  some 
reasonable  creature/  and  also  '  The  killer  of  God's  image/ 

This  replacement  of  equivalents  may  be  repeated  over 
and  over  again  to  any  extent.  Thus  if  person  is  identical 
in  meaning  with  individual,  it  follows  that 

Meeting  of  persons  =  meeting  of  individuals  ; 
and  if  assemblage  =  meeting,  we  may  make  a  new  replace 
ment  and  show -that 

Meeting  of  persons  =  assemblage  of  individuals. 
We  may  in  fact  found  upon  this  principle  of  substitution 
a  most  general  axiom  in  the  following  terms  ^  :— 

Same  parts  samely  related  make  same  wholes. 
If,  for  instance,  exactly  similar  bricks  be  used  to  build 
two  houses,  and  they  be  similarly  placed  in  each  house,  the 
two  houses  must  be  similar.  There  are  millions  of  cells 
in  a  human  body,  but  if  each  cell  of  one  person  were 
represented  by  an  exactly  similar  cell  similarly  placed  in 
another  body,  the  two  persons  would  be  undistinguishable, 
and  would  be  only  numerically  different.  It  is  upon  this 
principle,  as  we  shall  see,  that  all  accurate  processes  of 
measurement  depend.  If  for  a  weight  in  a  scale  of 
a  balance  we  substitute  another  weight,  and  the  equili 
brium  remains  entirely  unchanged,  then  the  weights  must 
be  exactly  equal.  The  general  test  of  equality  is  substi 
tution.  Objects  are  equally  bright  when  on  replacing  one 
by  the  other  the  eye  perceives  no  difference.  Two  objects 
are  equal  in  dimensions  when  tested  by  the  same  gauge 
they  fit  in  the  same  manner.  Generally  speaking,  two 
objects  are  alike  so  far  as  when  substituted  one  for  another 
no  alteration  is  produced,  and  vice  versd  when  alike  no 
alteration  is  produced  by  the  substitution. 

<i  '  Pure  Logic,  or  the  Logic  of  Quality,'  p.  14. 


24  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 


The  Propagating  Power  of  Identity. 

The  relation  of  identity  or  sameness  in  all  its  degrees 
is  reciprocal.  So  far  as  things  are  alike,  either  may  be 
substituted  for  the  other ;  and  this  may  perhaps  be  con 
sidered  the  very  meaning  of  the  relation.  But  it  is  well 
worth  notice  that  there  is  in  identity  a  peculiar  power  of 
extending  itself  among  all  the  things  which  are  identical. 
To  render  a  number  of  things  similar  to  each  other  we 
need  only  render  them  similar  to  one  standard  object. 
Each  coin  struck  from  a  pair  of  dies  not  only  exactly 
resembles  the  matrix  or  original  pattern  from  which  the 
dies  were  struck,  but  exactly  resembles  every  other  coin 
manufactured  from  the  same  original  pattern.  Among  a 
million  such  coins  there  are  not  less  than  499,999,500,000 
of  pairs  of  coins  exactly  resembling  each  other.  Similars 
to  the  same  are  similars  to  all.  It  is  one  great  advantage 
of  printing  that  all  copies  of  a  document  taken  from  the 
same  type  are  necessarily  identical  each  with  each,  and 
whatever  is  true  of  one  copy  will  be  true  of  every  copy. 
Similarly,  if  fifty  rows  of  pipes  in  an  organ  be  tuned  in 
perfect  unison  with  one  row,  usually  the  Principal,  they 
must  be  in  unison  with  each  other.  Identity  can  also 
reproduce  or  propagate  itself  ad  infinitum ;  for  if  a 
number  of  tuning-forks  be  adjusted  in  perfect  unison 
with  one  standard  fork,  all  instruments  tuned  to  any  one 
fork  will  agree  with  any  instrument  tuned  to  any  other 
fork.  Standard  measures  of  length,  capacity,  or  weight, 
or  any  other  measureable  quality,  are  propagated  in  the 
same  manner.  So  far  as  copies  of  the  original  standard, 
or  copies  of  copies,  or  copies  again  of  those  copies,  are 
accurately  executed,  they  must  all  agree  each  with  every 
other. 

It  is   the   power  of  mutual  substitution  which  gives 


IN  TROD  UCTION.  25 


such  great  value  to  the  modern  methods  of  mechanical 
construction,  according  to  which  all  the  parts  of  a 
machine  are  exact  facsimiles  of  a  fixed  pattern.  All 
the  rifles  used  in  the  British  army  are  constructed  on 
the  interchangeable  system,  so  that  any  one  part  of  any 
one  rifle  can  be  substituted  indifferently  for  the  same 
part  of  another.  A  bullet  fitting  one  rifle  wih1  fit  all 
others  of  the  same  bore.  Sir  J.  Whitworth  has  extended 
the  same  system  to  the  screws  and  screw-bolts  used  in 
connecting  together  the  parts  of  machines,  by  establishing 
a  series  of  standard  screws. 

Anticipations  of  the  Principle  of  Substitution. 

In  such  a  subject  as  logic  it  is  hardly  possible  to  put 
forth  any  opinions  or  principles  which  have  not  been 
in  some  degree  previously  entertained.  The  germ  at 
least  of  every  doctrine  will  be  found  in  earlier  writers, 
and  novelty  must  arise  chiefly  in  the  mode  of  harmonising 
and  developing  ideas.  When  I  first  proposed  to  employ 
the  process  and  name  of  substitution  in  logic  r,  I  believe 
that  I  was  led  to  do  so  from  analogy  with  the  familiar 

o«/ 

mathematical  process  of  substituting  for  a  symbol  its  value 
as  given  in  an  equation.  In  writing  my  first  logical  essay 
I  had  a  most  imperfect  conception  of  the  importance 
and  generality  of  the  process,  and  I  described,  as  if  they 
were  of  equal  importance,  a  number  of  other  laws  which 
now  seem  to  be  but  particular  cases  of  the  one  general 
rule  of  substitution. 

My  second  essay,  the  Substitution  of  Similars,  was 
written  shortly  after  I  had  become  aware  of  the  great 
simplification  which  may  be  effected  by  a  proper  appli 
cation  of  the  principle  of  substitution.  I  was  not  then 
acquainted  with  the  fact  that  the  German  logician 

r  'Pure  Logic,'  pp.  18-19. 


26  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

Beneke  had  employed  the  principle  of  substitution,  and 
had  used  the  word  itself  in  forming  a  theory  of  the 
syllogism.  My  imperfect  acquaintance  with  the  German 
language  had  prevented  me  from  acquiring  a  complete 
knowledge  of  Beneke's  views,  but  there  is  no  doubt 
that  Mr.  Lindsay  is  right  in  saying  that  he,  and  probably 
other  previous  logicians,  were  in  some  degree  familiar 
with  the  principle8.  Even  Aristotle's  dictum  may  be 
regarded  as  an  imperfect  statement  of  the  principle  of 
substitution ;  and,  as  I  have  pointed  out,  we  have  only 
to  modify  that  dictum  in  accordance  with  the  quantifi 
cation  of  the  predicate  in  order  to  arrive  at  the  complete 
process  of  substitution  *.  The  Port-Royal  logicians  appear 
to  have  entertained  nearly  equivalent  views,  for  they 
considered  that  all  moods  of  the  syllogism  might  be 
reduced  under  one  general  principle11.  Of  two  premises 
they  regard  one  as  the  containing  proposition  (propositio 
continens),  and  the  other  as  the  applicative  proposition. 
The  latter  proposition  must  always  be  affirmative,  and 
represents  that  by  which  a  substitution  is  made ;  the 
former  may  or  may  not  be  negative,  and  is  that  in 
which  a  substitution  is  effected.  They  also  show  that 
this  method  will  embrace  certain  cases  of  complex  reason 
ing  which  had  no  place  in  the  Aristotelian  syllogism. 
Their  views  probably  constitute  the  greatest  improvement 
in  logical  doctrine  made  up  to  that  time  since  the  days 
of  Aristotle.  But  a  true  reform  in  logic  must  consist, 
not  in  explaining  the  syllogism  in  one  way  or  another, 
but  in  doing  away  with  all  the  narrow  restrictions  of 
the  Aristotelian  system,  and  in  showing  that  there  exists 

6  Ueberweg's  'System  of  Logic,'  transl.  by  Lindsay,  pp.  442-446, 
571,572. 

fc  '  Substitution  of  Similars,'  p.  9. 

u  'Port-Royal  Logic,'  transl.  by  Spencer  Baynes,  pp.  212-219. 
Part  III.  chap.  x.  and  xi. 


INTRODUCTION.  27 


an  indefinite  extent  of  logical  arguments  immediately 
deducible  from  the  principle  of  substitution  of  which 
the  ancient  syllogism  forms  but  a  small  and  not  even 
the  most  important  part. 

The  Logic  of  Relatives. 

There  is  a  difficult  and  important  branch  of  logic 
which  may  be  called  the  Logic  of  Relatives.  If  I  argue, 
for  instance,  that  because  Daniel  Bernoulli  was  the  son 
of  John,  and  John  the  brother  of  James,  therefore  Daniel 
was  the  nephew  of  James,  it  is  not  possible  to  prove 
this  conclusion  by  any  simple  logical  process.  We  re 
quire  at  any  rate  to  assume  that  the  son  of  a  brother  is 
a  nephew.  A  simple  logical  relation  is  that  which  exists 
between  properties  and  circumstances  of  the  same  object 
or  class.  But  objects  and  classes  of  objects  may  also  be 
related  according  to  all  the  properties  of  time  and  space. 
I  believe  it  may  be  shown,  indeed,  that  where  an  inference 
concerning  such  relations  is  drawn,  a  process  of  substi 
tution  is  really  employed  and  an  identity  must  exist ; 
but  I  will  not  undertake  to  prove  the  assertion  in  this 
work.  The  relations  of  time  and  space  are  logical 
relations  of  a  complicated  character  demanding  much 
abstract  and  difficult  investigation.  The  subject  has  been 
treated  with  such  great  ability  by  Professors  Peircex, 
De  Morgan y,  Ellis2,  and  Harley,  that  I  will  not  in  the 

x  '  Description  of  a  Notation  for  the  Logic  of  Relatives,  resulting  from 
an  Amplification  of  the  Conceptions  of  Boole's  Calculus  of  Logic.'  By 
C.  S.  Peirce.  '  Memoirs  of  the  American  Academy,'  vol.  ix.  Cam 
bridge,  U.S.,  1870. 

y  '  On  the  Syllogism,  No.  IV,  and  on  the  Logic  of  Relations.'  By 
Augustus  De  Morgan.  'Transactions  of  the  Cambridge  Philosophical 
Society,'  vol.  x.  part  ii.  1860. 

z  '  Observations  on  Boole's  Laws  of  Thought.'  By  the  late  R. 
Leslie  Ellis;  communicated  by  the  Rev.  Robert  Harley,  F.R.S,  'Report 


28  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

present  work  attempt  any  review  of  their  writings,  but 
merely  refer  to  the  publications  in  which  they  are  to 
be  found. 


of  the  British  Association,'  1870.  'Report  of  Sections/  p.  12.  Also, 
<  On  Boole's  Laws  of  Thought.'  By  the  Rev.  Robert  Harley,  F.R.S., 
ibid.  p.  14. 


CHAPTEE    II. 

TERMS. 

EVERY  proposition  expresses  the  resemblance  or  differ 
ence  of  the  things  denoted  by  its  terms.  As  reasoning 
or  inference  treats  of  the  relation  between  two  or  more 
propositions,  so  a  proposition  consists  in  a  relation 
between  two  or  more  terms.  In  the  portion  of  this 
work  which  treats  of  deduction  it  will  be  convenient 
to  follow  the  usual  order  of  exposition,  and  consider  in 
succession  the  various  kinds  of  terms,  propositions,  and 
arguments,  and  we  commence  in  this  chapter  with  terms. 

The  simplest  and  most  palpable  meaning  which  can 
belong  to  a  term  consists  of  some  single  material  object, 
such  as  Westminster  Abbey,  the  Sun,  Sirius,  Stonehenge, 
&c.  It  is  probable  that  in  the  earliest  stages  of  intellect 
only  concrete  and  palpable  things  are  the  objects  of 
thought.  The  youngest  child  knows  the  difference 
between  a  hot  and  a  cold  body.  The  dog  can  recognise 
his  master  among  a  hundred  other  persons,  and  animals 
of  much  lower  intelligence  know  and  discriminate  their 
haunts.  In  all  such  acts  there  is  judgment  concerning 
the  likeness  or  unlikeness  of  physical  objects,  but  there 
is  little  or  no  power  of  analysing  each  object  and  re 
garding  it  as  a  group  of  qualities  or  circumstances. 

The  dignity  of  intellect  begins  with  the  power  of 
separating  points  of  agreement  from  those  of  difference. 
Comparison  of  two  objects  may  lead  us  to  perceive  that 


30  THE  PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

they  are  at  once  like  and  unlike.  Two  fragments  of 
rock  may  differ  entirely  in  outward  form,  yet  they  may 
have  the  same  colour,  hardness,  and  texture.  Flowers 
which  agree  in  colour  may  differ  in  odour.  The  mind 
learns  to  regard  each  object  as  an  aggregate  of  qualities, 
and  acquires  the  power  of  dwelling  at  will  upon  one  or 
other  of  those  qualities  to  the  exclusion  of  the  rest. 
Logical  abstraction,  in  short,  comes  into  play,  and  the 
mind  becomes  capable  of  reasoning,  not  merely  about 
objects  which  are  physically  complete  and  concrete,  but 
about  things  which  may  be  thought  of  separately  in 
the  mind  though  they  exist  not  separately  in  nature. 
We  can  think  of  the  hardness  of  a  rock,  or  the  colour 
of  a  flower,  and  thus  produce  abstract  notions,  denoted 
by  abstract  terms  which  will  form  a  subject  for  further 
consideration. 

At  the  same  time  arise  general  notions  and  classes  of 
objects.  We  cannot  fail  to  observe  that  the  quality 
hardness  exists  in  many  objects,  for  instance  in  many 
fragments  of  rock  ;  and  mentally  joining  these  we  create 
the  class  hard  object,  which  will  include,  not  only  the 
actual  objects  examined,  but  all  others  which  may 
happen  to  agree  with  them  as  they  agree  with  each 
other.  As  our  senses  cannot  possibly  report  to  us  all 
the  contents  of  space,  we  cannot  usually  set  any  limits 
to  the  number  of  objects  which  may  fall  into  any  such 
class.  At  this  point  we  begin  to  perceive  the  power  and 
generality  of  thought  which  enables  us  at  once  to  treat 
of  indefinitely  or  even  infinitely  numerous  objects.  We 
can  safely  assert  that  whatever  is  true  of  any  one  object 
coming  under  a  general  notion  or  class  is  true  of  any  of 
the  other  objects  so  far  as  they  possess  the  common 
qualities  implied  in  their  belonging  to  the  class.  We 
must  not  place  an  individual  thing  in  a  class  unless  we 
are  prepared  to  believe  of  it  all  that  is  believed  of  the 


TERMS.  31 

class  in  general ;  but  it  remains  as  a  matter  of  important 
consideration  how  far  and  in  what  manner  we  can  safely 
undertake  thus  to  assign  the  place  of  objects  in  that 
general  system  of  classification  which  constitutes  the 
whole  body  of  science. 

Twofold  Meaning  of  General  Names. 

Etymologically  the  meaning  of  a  name  is  what  we  are 
caused  to  think  of  when  the  name  is  used.  Now  every 
general  name  causes  us  to  think  of  some  one  or  more  of 
the  objects  belonging  to  a  class ;  it  may  also  cause  us  to 
think  of  the  common  qualities  possessed  by  those  objects. 
A  name  is  said  to  denote  the  distinct  object  of  thought 
to  which  it  may  be  applied  ;  it  implies  at  the  same  time 
the  possession  of  certain  qualities  or  circumstances.  The 
number  of  objects  denoted  forms  the  extent  of  meaning 
of  the  term ;  the  number  of  qualities  implied  forms 
the  intent  of  meaning.  Crystal  is  the  name  of  any  sub 
stance  of  which  the  molecules  are  arranged  in  a  regular 
geometrical  manner.  The  substances  or  objects  in  ques 
tion  form  the  extent  of  meaning  ;  the  circumstance  of 
having  the  molecules  so  arranged  forms  the  intent  of 
meaning. 

When  we  compare  a  variety  of  general  terms  it  may 
often  be  found  that  the  meaning  of  one  is  included  in 
the  meaning  of  another.  Thus  all  crystals  are  included 
among  material  substances,  and  all  opaque  crystals  are  in 
cluded  among  crystals:  here  the  inclusion  is  in  extension. 
We  may  also  have  inclusion  of  meaning  in  regard  to 
intension.  For  as  all  crystals  are  material  substances, 

«/ 

the  qualities  implied  by  the  term  material  substance 
must  be  among  those  implied  by  crystal.  Again,  it  is 
obvious  that  while  in  extension  of  meaning  opaque 
crystals  are  but  a  part  of  crystals,  in  intension  of  meaning 


32  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

crystal  is  but  part  of  opaque  crystal.  We  increase  the 
intent  of  meaning  of  a  term  by  joining  adjectives,  or 
phrases  equivalent  to  adjectives,  to  it,  and  the  removal 
of  such  adjectives  of  course  decreases  the  intensive 
meaning.  Now  concerning  such  changes  of  meaning 
the  following  all-important  law  holds  universally  true. 
When  the  intent  of  meaning  of  a  term  is  increased  the 
extent  is  decreased;  and  vice  versa,  ivhen  the  extent  is 
increased  the  intent  is  decreased.  In  short,  as  one  is 
increased  the  other  is  decreased. 

This  law  refers  only  to  logical  changes.  The  number 
of  steam  engines  in  the  world  may  be  undergoing  a 
rapid  increase  without  the  intensive  meaning  of  the 
name  being  altered.  The  law  will  only  be  verified  again 
when  there  is  a  real  change  in  the  intensive  meaning, 
and  an  adjective  may  often  be  joined  to  a  noun  without 
making  a  change.  Elementary  metal  is  identical  with 
metal ;  mortal  man  with  man ;  it  being  a  property  of  all 
metals  to  be  elements,  and  all  men  to  be  mortals. 

There  is  no  limit  to  the  amount  of  meaning  which 
a  term  may  have.  A  term  may  denote  one  object,  or 
many,  or  an  infinite  number;  it  may  imply  a  single 
quality,  if  such  there  be,  or  a  group  of  any  number  of 
qualities,  and  yet  the  law  connecting  the  extension  and 
intension  will  infallibly  apply.  Taking  the  general 
name  planet,  we  increase  its  intension  and  decrease  its 
extension  by  prefixing  the  adjective  exterior ;  and  if  we 
further  add  nearest  to  the  earth,  there  remains  but  one 
planet  Mars,  to  which  the  name  can  then  be  applied. 
Singular  terms,  which  denote  a  single  individual  only, 
come  under  the  same  law  of  meaning  as  general  names. 
They  may  be  regarded  as  general  names  of  which  the 
meaning  in  extension  is  reduced  to  a  minimum.  Logi 
cians  have  erroneously  asserted,  as  it  seems  to  me,  that 
singular  terms  are  devoid  of  meaning  in  intension,  the 


TERMS.  33 

fact  being  that  they  exceed  all  other  terms  in  that  kind 
of  meaning,  as  I  have  elsewhere  tried  to  show a. 

Abstract  Terms. 

Comparison  of  different  objects,  and  analysis  of  the 
complex  resemblances  and  differences  which  they  present, 
lead  us  to  the  conception  of  abstract  qualities.  We  learn 
to  think  of  one  object  as  not  only  different  from  another, 
but  as  differing  in  some  particular  point,  such  as  colour, 
or  weight,  or  size.  We  may  then  convert  points  of 
agreement  or  difference  into  separate  objects  of  thought 
called  qualities,  and  denoted  by  abstract  terms.  Thus 
the  term  redness  means  something  in  which  a  number 
of  objects  agree  as  to  colour,  and  in  virtue  of  which  they 
are  called  red.  Eedness  forms,  in  fact,  the  intensive 
meaning  of  the  term  red. 

Abstract  terms  are  strongly  distinguished  from  general 
terms  by  possessing  only  one  kind  of  meaning  ;  for  as 
they  denote  qualities  there  is  nothing  which  they  can  in 
addition  imply.  The  adjective  'red'  is  the  name  of  red 
objects,  but  it  implies  the  possession  by  them  of  the 
quality  redness ;  but  this  latter  term  has  one  single 
meaning — the  quality  alone.  Thus  it  arises  that  abstract 
terms  are  incapable  of  number  or  plurality.  Red  objects 
are  numerically  distinct  each  from  each,  and  there  are  a 
multitude  of  such  objects  ;  but  redness  is  a  single  exis 
tence  which  runs  through  all  those  objects,  and  is  the 
same  in  one  as  it  is  in  another.  It  is  true  that  we  may 
speak  of  rednesses,  meaning  different  kinds  or  tints  of 
redness,  just  as  we  may  speak  of  colours,  meaning  dif 
ferent  kinds  of  colours.  But  in  distinguishing  kinds, 

a  J.  S.  Mill,  'System  of  Logic,'  Book  I.  chap.  ii.  section  5.  Jevons' 
'Elementary  Lessons  in  Logic/  pp.  41-43;  'Pure  Logic,'  p.  6.  See 
also  Shedden's  'Elements  of  Logic/  London,  1864,  pp.  14,  &c. 

D 


decrees  or  other  differences,  we  render  the  terms  so  for 
concrete.  In  that  they  are  merely  red  there  is  but  a 
single  nature  in  red  objects,  and  so  far  as  things  are 
merely  coloured,  colour  is  a  single  indivisible  quality. 
Redness,  so  far  as  it  is  redness  merely,  is  one  and 
same  everywhere,  and  possesses  absolute  oneness  or  unity. 
In  virtue  of  this  unity  we  acquire  the  power  of  treating 
all  instances  of  such  quality  as  we  may  treat  any  one. 
We  possess,  in  short,  general  knowledge. 

Substantial  Terms. 

Logicians  appear  to  have  taken  very  little  notice  of  a 
large  class  of  terms  which  partake  in  certain  respects  of 
the  character  of  abstract  terms  and  yet  are  undoubtedly 
the  names  of  concrete  existing  things.  These  terms  are 
the  names  of  substances,  such  as  gold,  carbonate  of  lime, 
nitrogen,  &c.  We  cannot  speak  of  two  golds,  twenty 
carbonates  of  lime,  or  a  hundred  nitrogens.  There  is  no 
such  distinction  between  the  parts  of  a  uniform  sub 
stance  as  will  allow  of  a  discrimination  of  numerous 
individuals.  The  qualities  of  colour,  lustre,  malleability, 
density,  &c.,  by  which  we  recognise  gold,  extend  through 
its  substance  irrespective  of  particular  size  or  shape.  So 
far  as  a  substance  is  gold,  it  is  one  and  the  same  every 
where  ;  so  that  terms  of  this  kind,  which  I  propose  to  call 
substantial  terms,  possess  the  peculiar  unity  of  abstract 
terms.  Yet  they  are  not  abstract ;  for  gold  is  of  course 
a  tangible  visible  body,  entirely  concrete,  and  existing 
physically  independent  of  other  bodies. 

It  is  only  when  we  break  up,  by  actual  mechanical 
division,  the  uniform  whole  which  forms  the  meaning  of 
a  substantial  term,  that  we  introduce  the  notion  of 
number.  Piece  of  gold  is  a  term  capable  of  plurality  ; 
for  there  may  be  an  endless  variety  of  pieces  discriminated 


TERMS.  35 

from  each  other,  either  by  their  various  shapes  and  sizes, 
or,  in  the  absence  of  such  marks,  by  occupying  simul 
taneously  different  parts  of  space.  In  substance  they  are 
one ;  as  regards  the  properties  of  space  they  are  many. 
We  need  not  further  pursue  this  distinction  between 
unity  and  plurality  until  we  come  to  consider  the  prin 
ciples  of  number  in  a  subsequent  chapter. 

Collective  Terms. 

We  must  clearly  distinguish  between  the  collective  and 
the  general  meaning  of  terms.  The  same  name  may  be 
used  to  denote  the  whole  body  of  existing  objects  of  a 
certain  kind,  or  any  one  of  those  objects  taken  separately. 
'  Man '  may  mean  the  aggregate  of  existing  men,  which  we 
sometimes  describe  as  mankind ;  it  is  also  the  general 
name  applying  to  any  man.  The  vegetable  kingdom  is 
the  name  of  the  whole  aggregate  of  plants,  but  '  plant ' 
itself  is  a  general  name  applying  to  any  one  or  other 
plant.  Every  material  object  may  be  conceived  as  divi 
sible  into  parts,  and  is  therefore  collective  as  regards 
those  parts.  The  animal  body  is  made  up  of  cells  and 
fibres,  a  crystal  of  molecules  ;  wherever  physical  division, 
or  as  it  has  been  called  partition,  is  possible,  there  we 
deal  in  reality  with  a  collective  whole.  Thus  the  greater 
number  of  general  terms  are  at  the  same  time  collective 
as  regards  each  individual  whole  which  they  denote. 

It  need  hardly  be  pointed  out  that  we  must  not  infer 
of  a  collective  whole  what  we  know  of  the  parts,  nor  of 
the  parts  what  we  know  only  of  the  whole.  The  relation 
of  whole  and  part  is  not  one  of  identity,  and  does  not 
allow  of  substitution.  There  may  nevertheless  be  qualities 
or  circumstances  which  are  true  alike  of  the  whole  and  its 
parts.  Thus  a  number  of  organ  pipes  tuned  in  unison 
produce  an  aggregate  of  sound  which  is  of  exactly  the  same 

D    2 


pitch  SB  each  separate  sound.  In  the  case  of  substantial 
terms,  certain  qualities  may  be  present  equally  m  each 
minutest  part  as  in  the  whole.  The  chemical  nature  of 
the  largest  mass  of  pure  carbonate  of  lime  in  existence  is 
the  same  as  the  nature  of  the  smallest  particle  In  the 
case  of  abstract  terms,  again,  we  cannot  draw  a  distinction 
between  whole  and  part ;  what  is  true  of  redness  in  any 
case  is  always  true  of  redness,  so  far  as  it  is  merely  red. 

Synthesis  of  Terms. 

We  continually  combine  simple  terms  together  so  as  to 
form  new  terms  of  more  complex  meaning.  Thus,  to 
increase  the  intension  of  meaning  of  a  term  we  write  it 
with  an  adjective  or  a  phrase  of  adjectival  nature.  By 
joining  'brittle'  to  'metal/  we  obtain  a  combined  term, 
'brittle  metal,'  which  denotes  a  certain  portion  of  the 
metals,  namely  such  as  are  selected  on  account  of  pos 
sessing  the  quality  of  brittleness.  As  we  have  already  seen, 
'brittle  metal'  possesses  less  extension  and  greater  in 
tension  than  metal.  Nouns,  prepositional  phrases,  parti 
cipial  phrases  and  subordinate  propositions  may  also  be 
added  to  terms  so  as  to  increase  their  intension  and 
decrease  their  extension. 

In  our  symbolic  language  we  need  some  mode  of 
indicating  this  junction  of  terms,  and  the  most  convenient 
device  will  be  the  simple  juxtaposition  of  the  distinct 
letter-terms.  Thus  if  A  mean  brittle,  and  B  mean  metal, 
then  AB  will  mean  brittle  metal.  Nor  need  there  be  any 
limit  to  the  number  of  letters  thus  joined  together,  or  the 
complexity  of  the  notions  which  they  may  represent. 

Thus  if  we  take  the  letters 
P  =  metal, 
Q  =  white, 
B  =  monovalent, 


TERMS.  37 

S  =  of  specific  gravity  io-5, 

T  =  melting  above  iooo°C, 

Y  =  good  conductor  of  heat  and  electricity, 
then  we  can  form  a  combined  term  PQRSTY,  which  will 
denote   '  a  white   monovalent    metal,   of   specific    gravity 
10*5,  melting  above  iooo°C,  and  a  good  conductor  of  heat 
and  electricity/ 

There  are  many  grammatical  rules  or  usages  concerning 
the  junction  of  words  and  phrases  to  which  we  need  pay 
no    attention   in   logic.     We  can  never  say  in  ordinary 
language  'of  wood    table/  meaning  'a    table  of   wood/ 
but  we   may  consider  '  of  wood '   as  logically  an  exact 
equivalent  of  '  wooden ' ;  so  that  if 
X  =  of  wood, 
Y  =  table, 

there  is  no  reason  why,  in  our  symbols,  XY  should  not  be 
the  correct  term  for  '  table  of  wood/  In  this  case  indeed 
we  might  substitute  the  corresponding  adjective  'wooden/ 
but  we  should  often  fail  to  find  any  adjective  answering 
exactly  to  a  phrase.  There  is  no  single  word  which  could 
express  the  notion  '  of  specific  gravity  10*5  ':  but  logically 
we  may  consider  these  words  as  forming  an  adjective  ;  and 
denoting  this  by  S  and  metal  by  P,  we  may  say  that  SP 
means  'metal  of  specific  gravity  10*5.'  It  is  one  of  many 
advantages  in  these  blank  letter- symbols  that  they  enable 
us  completely  to  abstract  all  grammatical  peculiarities  and 
fix  our  attention  solely  on  the  purely  logical  relations 
involved.  Investigation  will  probably  show  that  the  rules 
of  grammar  are  mainly  founded  upon  traditional  usage 
and  have  little  logical  signification.  This  indeed  is  suffi 
ciently  proved  by  the  wide  grammatical  differences  which 
exist  between  languages  where  the  logical  foundation  must 
be  the  same. 


38 


TlIK   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 


Symbolic  Expression  of  the  Law  of  Contradiction. 

The  synthesis  of  terms  is  subject  to  the  all-important 
Law  of  Thought,  described  in  a  previous  section  (p.   6) 
and  called  the  Law  of  Contradiction.     It  is  self-evident 
that  no  quality  or  circumstance  can  be  both  present  and 
absent  at  the  same  time   and  place.     This  fundamental 
condition  of  all  thought  and  all  existence  is  expressed 
symbolically  by  a  rule  that  a  term  and  its  negative  shall 
never  be  allowed  to  come  into  combination.     Such  com 
bined  terms  as  Ao,  B&,  Cc,  &c.  are  self-contradictory  and 
devoid  of  all  meaning.     If  they  represented  anything,  it 
would  be  what  cannot  exist,  and  cannot  even  be  imagined 
in  the  mind.     They  can  therefore  only  enter  into  our  con 
sideration  to  suffer  immediate  exclusion.    The   criterion 
of  false  reasoning,  as  we  shall  find,  is  that  it  involves 
self-contradiction,  the  affirming  and  denying  of  the  same 
statement.     Thus  we  might  represent  the  object  of  all 
reasoning  as  the  separation  of  the  consistent  and  possible 
from  the  inconsistent  and  impossible  ;  and  we  cannot  make 
any  inference  without  implying  that  certain  combinations 
of  terms  are  contradictory  and  excluded  from  thought. 
To  conclude  that  'all  A's  are   BV  is  equivalent  to  the 
assertion  that  '  A's  which  are  riot  B's  cannot  exist.' 

It  will  be  convenient  to  have  the  means  of  indicating 
this  exclusion  of  the  self-contradictory ;  and  we  may  use 
the  familiar  sign  for  nothing,  the  cipher  o.  Thus  the 
second  law  of  thought  may  be  symbolised  in  the  forms 

Aa  =  o        AB6  =  o        ABCa  —  o. 
We  may  variously  describe  the  meaning  of  o  in  logic  as 
the  non-existent,  the  impossible,  the  self-inconsistent,  the 
inconceivable.     Close  analogy  exists  between  this  meaning 
and  its  mathematical  signification. 

^ 


TERMS.  39 


Certain  Special  Conditions  of  Logical  Symbols. 

In  order  that  we  may  argue  and  infer  truly  we  must 
treat  our  logical  symbols  according  to  the  fundamental 
laws  of  Identity  and  Difference.  But  in  thus  using  our 
symbols  we  shall  frequently  meet  with  combinations  of 
which  the  meaning  will  not  at  first  be  apparent.  In  some 
cases,  for  instance,  we  may  learn  that  an  object  is  '  yellow 
and  round/  in  other  cases  that  it  is  '  round  and  yellow ' : 
there  arises  the  question  whether  these  two  descriptions 
are  identical  in  meaning  or  not.  Or  again,  if  we  proved 
that  an  object  was  '  round  round'  the  meaning  of  such  an 
expression  would  be  open  to  doubt.  Accordingly  we  must 
take  notice,  before  proceeding  further,  of  certain  special 
laws  which  govern  the  combination  of  logical  terms. 

In  the  first  place  the  combination  of  a  logical  term 
with  itself  is  without  effect,  just  as  the  repetition  of  a 
statement  does  not  alter  the  meaning  of  the  statement : 
'  a  round  round  object'  is  simply  'a  round  object.'  What 
is  yellow  yellow  is  merely  yellow ;  metallic  metals  cannot 
differ  from  metals,  nor  elementary  elements  from  elements. 
In  our  symbolic  language  we  may  similarly  hold  that  AA 
is  identical  with  A,  or 

A  =  AA  =  AAA  =  &c. 

The  late  Professor  Boole  is  the  only  logician  in  modern 
times  who  has  drawn  attention  to  this  remarkable  property 
of  logical  termsb  ;  but  in  place  of  the  name  which  he  gave 
to  the  law,  I  have  proposed  to  call  it  The  Law  of  Sim 
plicity  c.  Its  high  importance  will  only  become  apparent 
when  we  attempt  to  determine  the  relations  of  logical  and 
mathematical  science.  Two  symbols  of  quantity,  and  only 

b  'Mathematical  Analysis  of  Logic,'  Cambridge,   1847,  P-   J7-     '  An 
Investigation  of  the  Laws  of  Thought,'  London,  1854,  p.  29. 
c  '  Pure  Logic/  p.  1 5. 


40  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 


two,  seem  to  obey  this  law  ;  we  may  say  that  1.1  =  i,  and 
o.o  =  o  (taking  o  to  mean  absolute  zero  or  i  —  i) ;  there 
is  apparently  no  other  number  which  combined  with  itself 
gives  an  unchanged  result.  I  shall  point  out,  however,  in 
the  chapter  upon  Number,  that  in  reality  all  numerical 
symbols  obey  this  logical  principle. 

It  is  curious  that  this  Law  of  Simplicity,  though  almost 
unnoticed  in  modern  times,  was  known  to  Boethius,  who 
makes  a  singular  remark  in  his  treatise  '  De  Trinitate 
et  Unitate  Dei'  (p.  959).  He  says,  '  If  I  should  say  sun, 
sun,  sun,  I  should  not  have  made  three  suns,  but  I  should 
have  named  one  sun  so  many  times  d.'  Ancient  discussions 
concerning  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  drew  more  atten 
tion  to  subtle  questions  concerning  the  nature  of  unity 
and  plurality  than  has  ever  since  been  given  to  them. 

It  is  a  second  law  of  logical  symbols  that  order  of 
combination  is  a  matter  of  indifference.  'Rich  and  rare 
gems '  are  the  same  as  '  rare  and  rich  gems,'  or  even  as 
'  gems,  rich  and  rare.'  Grammatical,  rhetorical  or  poetic 
usage  may  give  considerable  significance  to  order  of  ex 
pression.  The  limited  power  of  our  minds  prevents  our 
grasping  many  ideas  at  once,  and  thus  the  order  of 
statement  may  produce  some  effect,  but  not  in  a  strictly 
logical  mariner.  All  life  proceeds  in  the  succession  of 
time,  and  we  are  obliged  to  write,  speak,  or  even  think  of 
things  and  their  qualities  one  after  the  other  ;  but  be 
tween  the  things  and  their  qualities  there  need  be  no  such 
relation  of  order  in  time  or  space.  The  sweetness  of  sugar 
is  neither  before  nor  after  its  weight  and  solubility.  The 
hardness  of  a  metal,  its  colour,  weight,  opacity,  mallea 
bility,  electric  and  chemical  properties,  are  all  coexistent 
and  coextensive,  pervading  the  metal  and  every  part  of  it 

•  \  dut  si  dicam  Sol,  Sol,  Sol,  non  tres  soles  eff'ecerim,  seel  uno  totics 
pnodicaverim.1 


TERMS.  41 

in  perfect  community,  none  before  nor  after  the  others. 
In  our  words  and  symbols  we  cannot  observe  this  natural 
condition  ;  we  must  name  one  quality  first  and  another 
second,  just  as  some  one  must  be  the  first  to  sign  a  petition, 
or  to  walk  foremost  in  a  procession.  In  nature  there  is 
no  such  precedence. 

A  little  reflection  will  show  that  knowledge  in  the 
highest  perfection  would  consist  in  the  simultaneous 
possession  of  a  multitude  of  facts.  To  comprehend  a 
science  perfectly  we  should  have  every  fact  present  with 
every  other  fact.  We  must  write  a  book  and  we  must 
read  it  successively  word  by  word,  but  how  infinitely 
higher  would  be  our  powers  of  thought  if  we  could 
grasp  the  whole  in  one  collective  act  of  consciousness. 
Compared  with  the  brutes  we  do  possess  some  slight 
approximation  to  such  power,  and  it  is  just  conceivable 
that  in  the  indefinite  future  mind  may  acquire  a  vast 
increase  of  capacity,  and  be  less  restricted  to  the  piece 
meal  examination  of  a  subject.  But  I  wish  here  to 
make  plain  that  there  is  no  logical  foundation  for  the 
successive  character  of  thought  and  reasoning  unavoidable 
under  our  present  mental  conditions.  The  fact  that  we 
must  think  of  one  thing  first,  and  another  second,  is  a 
logical  weakness  and  imperfection.  We  must  describe 
metal  as  '  hard  and  opaque/  or  '  opaque  and  hard,'  but 
in  the  metal  itself  there  is  no  such  difference  of  order ; 
the  properties  are  simultaneous  and  coextensive  in 
existence. 

Setting  aside  all  grammatical  peculiarities  which  render 
a  substantive  less  moveable  than  an  adjective,  and  dis 
regarding  any  meaning  indicated  by  emphasis  or  marked 
order  of  words,  we  may  state,  as  a  general  law  of  logic, 
that  AB  is  identical  with  BA. 


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 


The  late  Professor  Boole  first  drew  attention,  so  far  as 
I  know,  to  this  property  of  logical  terms,  and  he  called 
it  the  property  of  Commutativenesse.  He  not  only  stated 
the  law  with  the  utmost  clearness,  but  pointed  out  that 
it  is  a  Law  of  Thought  rather  than  a  Law  of  Things. 
I  shall  have  in  various  parts  of  the  following  pages  to 
show  how  the  necessary  imperfection  of  our  symbols 
expressed  in  this  law  clings  to  our  modes  of  expression, 
and  introduces  complication  into  the  whole  body  of 
mathematical  formulae,  which  are  really  founded  on  a 
logical  basis. 

It  is  of  course  apparent  that  the  power  of  commutation 
belongs  only  to  terms  related  in  the  simple  logical  mode 
of  synthesis.  No  one  can  confuse  'a  house  of  bricks/ 
with  '  bricks  of  a  house/  '  twelve  square  feet'  with  '  twelve 
feet  square/  'the  water  of  crystallization'  with  'the 
crystallization  of  water.'  All  relations  which  involve 
differences  of  time  and  space  are  inconvertible;  the 
higher  must  not  be  made  to  change  place  with  the 
lower,  or  the  first  with  the  last.  For  the  parties  con 
cerned  there  is  all  the  difference  in  the  world  between  A 
killing  B  and  B  kiUing  A.  The  law  of  commutativeness 
simply  asserts  that  difference  of  order  does  not  attach  to 
the  connection  between  the  properties  and  circumstances 
of  a  thing— to  what  I  shall  call  simple  logical  relations. 

c  'Laws  of  Thought/  p.  29. 


CHAPTER   III. 

PROPOSITIONS. 

WE  now  proceed  to  consider  the  variety  of  forms  of 
propositions  in  which  the  truths  of  science  must  be 
expressed.  I  shall  endeavour  to  show  that,  however 
diverse  these  forms  may  be,  they  all  admit  the  application 
of  the  one  same  principle  of  influence,  that  what  is  true 
of  one  thing  or  circumstance  is  true  of  the  like  or  same. 
This  principle  holds  true  whatever  be  the  kind  or  manner 
of  the  likeness,  provided  proper  regard  be  had  to  its 
degree.  Propositions  may  assert  an  identity  of  time, 
space,  manner,  quantity,  degree,  or  any  other  circumstance 
in  which  things  may  agree  or  differ. 

We  find  an  instance  of  a  proposition  concerning  time 
in  the  following  : — '  The  year  in  which  Newton  was  born, 
was  the  year  in  which  Galileo  died/  This  proposition 
expresses  an  approximate  identity  of  time  between  two 
events ;  hence  whatever  is  true  of  the  year  in  which 
Galileo  died  is  true  of  that  in  which  Newton  was  born, 
and  vice  versd.  '  Tower  Hill  is  the  place  where  Raleigh 
was  executed'  expresses  an  identity  of  place ;  and  what 
ever  is  true  of  the  one  spot  is  true  of  the  spot  otherwise 
defined,  but  in  reality  the  same.  In  ordinary  language 
we  have  many  propositions  obscurely  expressing  identities 
of  number,  quantity,  or  degree.  '  So  many  men,  so  many 
minds/  is  a  proposition  concerning  number  or  an  equa 
tion  ;  whatever  is  true  of  the  number  of  men  is  true  of 
the  number  of  minds,  and  vice  versd.  '  The  density  of 
Mars  is  (nearly)  the  same  as  that  of  the  Earth/  '  The  force 


44  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 


of  gravity  is  directly  as  the  product  of  the  masses,  and 
inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance,'  are  propositions 
concerning  magnitude  or  degree.  Logicians  have  not  paid 
adequate  attention  to  the  great  variety  of  propositions 
which  can  be  stated  by  the  use  of  the  little  conjunction 
as,  together  with  so.  '  As  the  home  so  the  people,'  is  a 
proposition  expressing  identity  of  manner ;  and  a  great 
number  of  similar  propositions  all  indicating  some  kind  of 
resemblance  might  be  quoted.  Whatever  be  the  special 
kind  or  form  of  identity,  all  such  expressions  of  identity 
are  subject  to  the  great  principle  of  inference ;  but  as  we 
shall  in  later  parts  of  this  work  treat  more  particularly 
of  inference  in  cases  of  number  and  magnitude,  we  will 
here  confine  our  attention  to  the  logical  propositions 
which  involve  only  notions  of  quality. 

Simple  Identities. 

The  most  important  class  of  propositions    consists   of 
those  which  fall  under  the  formula 

A=B, 

and  may  be  called  simple  identities.  I  may  instance,  in 
the  first  place,  those  most  elementary  propositions  which 
express  the  exact  similarity  of  a  quality  encountered  in 
two  or  more  objects.  I  may  compare  by  memory  or 
otherwise  the  colour  of  the  Pacific  ocean  with  that  of 
the  Atlantic,  and  declare  them  identical.  I  may  assert 
that  'the  smell  of  a  rotten  egg  is  that  of  hydrogen 
sulphide,'  '  the  taste  of  silver  hyposulphite  is  that  of 
cane  sugar,' '  the  sound  of  an  earthquake  is  that  of  distant 
artillery.'  Such  are  propositions  stating,  accurately  or 
otherwise,  the  identity  or  non-identity  of  simple  physical 
sensations.  Judgments  of  this  kind  are  necessarily  pre 
supposed  in  more  complex  judgments.  If  I  declare  that 
'  this  coin  is  made  of  gold/  I  must  base  the  judgment  upon 


PROPOSITIONS.  45 


the  exact  likeness  of  the  substance  in  several  qualities  to 
other  pieces  of  substance  which  are  undoubtedly  of  gold. 
I  must  make  a  judgment  of  the  colour,  the  specific 
gravity,  the  hardness,  sound,  and  chemical  properties ; 
and  each  of  these  judgments  might  be  expressed  in  an 
elementary  proposition,  'the  colour  of  this  coin  is  the 
colour  of  gold/  and  so  on.  Even  when  we  establish 
the  identity  of  a  thing  with  itself  under  a  different 
name  or  aspect,  it  is  by  distinct  judgments  concerning 
single  circumstances.  To  prove  that  the  Homeric  xa^K °'? 
is  copper  we  must  show  the  identity  of  each  quality 
recorded  of  ^aX«-o?  with  a  quality  of  copper.  To  establish 
Deal  as  the  landing-place  of  Caesar,  every  circumstance 
must  be  shown  to  agree.  If  the  modern  Wroxeter  is 
the  ancient  Uriconium,  there  must  be  the  like  agreement 
of  all  features  of  the  country  not  subject  to  alteration  by 
time. 

All  such  identities  may  be  expressed  in  the  form  A  =  B. 
We  may  say 

Colour  of  Pacific  Ocean  =  Colour  of  Atlantic  Ocean. 
Smell  of  rotten  egg  =  Smell  of  hydrogen  sulphide. 
In  these  and  similar  propositions  we  assert  identity  of 
single   qualities   or   sensations.     But   in  the   same  form 
we  may  express  identity  of  any  group  of  qualities,  as  in 

^ccA/co?  =  Copper. 

Deal  =  Landing-place  of  Csesar. 

A  multitude  of  propositions  involving  singular  terms  fall 
into  the  same  form,  as  in 

The  Pole  star  =  The  slowest-moving  star. 

Jupiter  =  The  greatest  of  the  planets. 

The  ringed  planet  =  The  planet  having  seven  satel 
lites. 

The  Queen  of  England  =  The  Queen  of  India. 

The  number  two  =  The  even  prime  number. 

Honesty  =  The  best  policy. 


46  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

In  mathematical  and  scientific  theories  we  often  meet 
with  simple  identities  capable  of  expression  in  the  same 
form.     Thus  in  mechanical  science  '  The  process  for  finding 
the  resultant  of  forces  =  the  process   for  finding  the  re 
sultant  of  simultaneous  velocities  a/   Theorems  in  geometry 
often  give  results  in  this  form,  as- 
Equilateral  triangles  =  Equiangular  triangles. 
Circle  =  Finite  plane  curve  of  constant  curvature. 
Circle  =  Curve  of  least  perimeter. 

The  more  profound  and  important  laws  of  nature  are 
often  expressible  in  the  form  of  identities ;  in  addition  to 
some  instances  which  have  already  been  given  I  may 
suggest — 

Crystals   of  cubical  system  =  Crystals    incapable    of 

double  refraction. 

All  definitions  are  necessarily  of  this  form  of  simple 
identity,  whether  the  objects  defined  be  many,  few,  or  sin 
gular.  Thus  we  may  say — 

Common  salt  =  Sodium  chloride. 

Chlorophyl  =  Green  colouring  matter  of  leaves. 

Square  =  Equal-sided  rectangle. 

It  is  an  extraordinary  fact  that  propositions  of  this 
elementary  form,  all-important  and  very  numerous  as 
they  are,  had  no  recognised  place  in  Aristotle's  system  of 
Logic.  Accordingly  their  importance  was  overlooked  until 
very  recent  times,  and  logic  was  the  most  deformed  of 
sciences.  But  it  is  quite  impossible  that  Aristotle  or  any 
other  person  should  avoid  constantly  using  them  ;  not  a 
term  could  be  defined  without  their  use.  In  one  place  at 
least  Aristotle  actually  notices  a  proposition  of  the  kind. 
He  observes:— 'We  sometimes  say  that  that  white  thing 
is  Socrates,  or  that  the  object  approaching  is  CalliasV 
Here  we  certainly  have  simple  identity  of  terms  ;  but  he 

1  Thomson  and  Tait,  'Treatise  on  Natural  Philosophy,'  vol.  i.  p.  182. 
b.'  Prior  Analytics,'  I.  cap.  xxvii.  3. 


PROPOSITIONS.  47 


considered  such  propositions  purely  accidental,  and  came 
to  the  extraordinary  conclusion,  that  '  Singulars  cannot  be 
predicated  of  other  terms.' 

Propositions  may  also  express  the  identity  of  extensive 
groups  of  objects  taken  collectively  or  in  one  connected 
whole  ;  as  when  we  say — 

'  The  Queen,  Lords,  and  Commons  =  The  Legislature 

of  the  United  Kingdom/ 

When  Blackstone  asserts,  '  The  only  true  and  natural 
foundation  of  society  are  the  wants  and  fears  of  indi 
viduals/  we  must  interpret  him  as  meaning  that  the  whole 
of  the  wants  and  fears  of  individuals  in  the  aggregate  form 
the  foundation  of  society.  But  many  propositions  which 
might  seem  to  be  collective  are  but  groups  of  singular  pro 
positions  or  identities.  When  we  say  '  Potassium  andsodium 
are  the  metallic  bases  of  potash  and  soda,'  we  obviously 
mean- 
Potassium  =  Metallic  base  of  potash  ; 
Sodium  =  Metallic  base  of  soda. 

It  is  the  work  of  grammatical  analysis  to  separate  the 
various  propositions  often  combined  in  a  single  sentence. 
Logic  cannot  be  properly  required  to  interpret  the  forms 
and  devices  of  language,  but  to  treat  the  meaning  or 
information  when  clearly  exhibited. 

Partial  Identities. 

However  numerous  and  important  may  be  propositions 
expressing  simple  identity  of  one  term  or  class  with 
another,  there  is  an  almost  equally  important  kind  of 
proposition  which  I  propose  to  call  a  partial  identity. 
When  we  say  that  '  All  mammalia  are  vertebrata,'  we  do 
not  mean  that  mammalian  animals  are  identical  with 
vertebrate  animals,  but  only  that  the  mammalian  form  a 
part  of  the  class  vertebrata.  Such  a  proposition  was 
regarded  in  the  old  logic  as  asserting  the  inclusion  of  one 


48  777^  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

class  in  another,  or  of  an  object  in  a  class.  It  was  called 
a  universal  affirmative  proposition,  because  the  attribute 
vertebrate  was  affirmed  of  the  whole  subject  mammalia ; 
but  the  attribute  was  said  to  be  undistributed,  because 
not  all  vertebrata  were  of  necessity  involved  in  the  propo 
sition.  Aristotle,  overlooking  the  importance  of  simple 
identities,  and  indeed  almost  denying  their  existence,  un 
fortunately  founded  his  system  upon  the  notion  of  inclusion 
in  a  class,  in  place  of  identity.  He  regarded  inference  as 
resting  upon  the  rule  that  what  is  true  of  the  containing 
class  is  true  of  the  contained,  instead  of  the  vastly  more 
general  rule  that  what  is  true  of  a  class  or  thing  is  true 
of  the  like.  Thus  he  not  only  reduced  logic  to  a  fragment 
of  its  proper  self,  but  destroyed  the  deep  analogies  which 
bind  together  logical  and  mathematical  reasoning.  Hence 
a  crowd  of  defects,  difficulties  and  errors  which  will  long 
disfigure  the  first  and  simplest  of  the  sciences. 

It  is  surely  evident  that  the  relation  of  inclusion  rests 
upon  a  relation  of  identity.  Mammalian  animals  cannot 
be  included  among  vertebrates  unless  they  be  identical 
with  part  of  the  vertebrates.  Cabinet  Ministers  are  in 
cluded  almost  always  in  the  class  Members  of  Parlia 
ment,  because  they  are  identical  with  some  who  sit  in 
Parliament.  We  may  indicate  this  identity  with  a  part 
of  the  larger  class  in  various  ways ;  as  for  instance — 

Mammalia  =  part  of  the  vertebrata 

Diatoms  =  species  of  plants. 

Cabinet  Ministers  =  some  Members  of  Parliament. 

Iron  =  a  metal. 

In  ordinary  language  the  verbs  is  or  are  express  mere 
inclusion  more  often  than  not.  Men  are  mortals,  means 
that  men  form  a  part  of  the  class  mortal,  but  great  con 
fusion  exists  between  this  sense  of  the  verb  and  that  in 
which  it  expresses  identity,  as  in  '  The  sun  is  the  centre  of 
the  planetary  system.'  The  introduction  of  the  indefinite 


PROPOSITIONS.  49 

article  a  often  seems  to  express  partiality,  as  when  we  say 
'  Iron  is  a  metal '  we  clearly  mean  one  only  of  several 
metals. 

Certain  eminent  recent  logicians  have  proposed  to  avoid 
the  indefiniteness  in  question  by  what  is  called  the  Quan 
tification  of  the  Predicate,  and  they  have  generally  used 
the  little  word  some  to  show  that  only  a  part  of  the 
predicate  is  identical  with  the  subject0.  Some  is  an  in 
determinate  adjective ;  it  implies  unknown  qualities  by 
which  we  might  select  the  part  in  question  if  they  were 
known,  but  it  gives  no  hint  as  to  their  nature.  I  might 
make  extensive  use  of  such  an  indeterminate  sign  to 
express  partial  identities  in  this  work.  Thus,  taking  the 
special  symbol  V  =  some,  the  general  form  of  a  partial 
identity  would  be  A  =  VB,  and  in  Boole's  Logic  expres 
sions  of  the  kind  were  freely  used.  But  I  .find  that 
indeterminate  symbols  only  introduce  complexity,  and 
destroy  the  beauty  and  simple  universality  of  the  system 
which  may  be  created  without  their  use.  A  vague  word 
like  some  is  only  used  in  ordinary  language  by  ellipsis, 
and  to  avoid  the  trouble  of  attaining  accuracy.  We  can 
always  substitute  for  it  more  definite  expressions  if  we 
like  ;  but  when  once  the  indefinite  some  is  introduced  we 
cannot  replace  it  by  the  special  description.  We  do  not 
know  whether  some  colour  is  red,  yellow,  blue,  or  what  it 
is ;  but  on  the  other  hand  red  colour  is  certainly  some 
colour ;  as  is  also  yellow,  blue,  &c. 

Throughout  this  system  of  logic  I  shall  usually  dispense 
with  all  such  indefinite  expressions ;  and  this  can  readily 
be  done  by  substituting  one  of  the  other  terms.  To 
express  the  proposition  '  All  A's  are  some  B's '  I  shall  not 
use  the  form  A  =  VB,  but 

A  =  AB. 

c  'Elementary  Lessons  in  Logic,' p.  183.     '  Substitution  of  Similars,' 
p.  7. 

E 


50  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

This  formula  expresses  that  the  class  A  is  identical 
with  the  class  AB ;  and  as  the  latter  must  be  a  part  at 
least  of  the  class  B,  it  implies  the  inclusion  of  the  class  A 
in  that  of  B.  Thus  we  might  represent  our  former  ex 
ample  thus— 

Mammalia  =  Mammalian  vertebrata. 
This  proposition  asserts  identity  between  a  part  of  the 
vertebrata  and  the  mammalia.  If  it  is  asked  What  part  1 
the  proposition  affords  no  answer  except  that  it  is  the 
part  which  is  mammalian  ;  but  the  assertion  '  mammalia  = 
some  vertebrata'  tells  us  no  more. 

It  is  quite  likely  that  some  readers  may  think  this 
mode  of  representing  the  universal  affirmative  proposition 
of  the  old  logic  artificial  and  complicated.  I  will  not 
undertake  to  convince  them  of  the  opposite  at  this  point 
of  the  system.  My  justification  for  it  will  be  found,  not 
in  the  immediate  treatment  of  this  proposition,  but  in 
the  general  harmony  which  it  enables  us  to  discover 
between  all  parts  of  reasoning.  I  have  no  doubt  that 
this  is  the  point  of  critical  difficulty  in  the  relation  of 
logical  to  other  forms  of  reasoning.  Grant  this  mode 
of  denoting  that  '  all  A's  are  B's/  and  I  fear  no  further 
difficulties  ;  refuse  it,  and  we  find  want  of  analogy  and 
endless  complication  in  every  direction.  For  instance 
—Aristotle,  in  accepting  inclusion  of  class  in  class  as 
the  fundamental  relation  of  logic,  was  at  once  obliged 
to  ignore  the  existence  of  the  very  extensive  and  all- 
important  class  of  propositions  denoting  the  similarity 
of  one  thing  with  another.  It  is  on  general  grounds 
that  I  hope  to  show  overwhelming  reasons  for  seeking 
to  reduce  every  kind  of  proposition  to  the  form  of  an 
identity. 

I  may  add  that  not  a  few  previous  logicians  have 
accepted  this  view  of  the  universal  affirmative  proposition. 
Boole  often  employed  this  mode  of  expression,  and 


PROPOSITIONS.  51 


Spalding  d  distinctly  says  that  the  proposition  '  all  metals 
are  minerals '  might  be  described  as  an  assertion  of  partial 
identity  between  the  two  classes.  Hence  the  name  which 
I  have  adopted  for  the  proposition. 

Limited  Identities. 

A  highly  important  class  of  propositions  have  the 
general  form 

AB  =  AC, 

expressing  the  identity  of  the  class  AB  with  the  class  AC. 
In  other  words,  '  Within  the  sphere  of  the  class  of  things 
A,  all  the  B's  are  all  the  C's,J  or  'The  B's  and  C's,  which 
are  A's,  are  identical/  But  it  will  be  observed  that  nothing 
is  asserted  concerning  things  which  are  outside  of  the 
class  A  ;  and  thus  the  identity  is  of  limited  extent.  It  is 
the  proposition  B  =  C  limited  to  the  sphere  of  the  class  A. 
Thus  if  we  say '  Plants  are  devoid  of  locomotive  power/ 
we  must  limit  the  statement  to  large  plants,  since  minute 
microscopic  plants  often  have  very  remarkable  powers  of 
motion.  When  we  say  '  Metals  possess  metallic  lustre,'  we 
mean  in  their  uncombined  state. 

A  barrister  may  make  numbers  of  most  general  state 
ments  concerning  the  relations  of  persons  and  things  in 
the  course  of  an  argument,  but  it  is  of  course  to  be  under 
stood  that  he  speaks  only  of  persons  and  things  under  the 
English  Law.  Even  mathematicians  make  statements 
which  are  not  true  with  absolute  generality.  They  say 
that  imaginary  roots  enter  into  equations  by  pairs  ;  but 
this  is  only  true  under  the  tacit  condition  that  the 
equations  in  question  shall  not  have  imaginary  coefficients.*3 

d  'Encyclopaedia  Britannica,'  Eighth  Ed.  art.  Logic,  sect.  37,  note. 
8vo  reprint,  p.  79. 

e  De  Morgan  '  On  the  Root  of  any  Function.'  Cambridge  Philosophical 
Ti-ansactions,  1867,  vol.xi.  p.  25. 

E    2 


52 


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 


The  universe,  in  short,  within  which  they  habitually  dis 
course  is  that  of  equations  with  real  coefficients.  These 
implied  limitations  form  part  of  that  great  mass  of  tacil 
knowledge  which  accompanies  all  special  arguments. 

It  is  worthy  of  inquiry  whether  almost  all  identities 
are  not  really  limited  to  an  implied  sphere  of  meaning. 
When  we  make  such  a  plain  statement  as  '  Gold  is  mal 
leable'  we  obviously  speak  of  gold  only  in  its  solid  state  ; 
when  we  say  that  '  Mercury  is  a  liquid  metal '  we  must 
be  understood  to  exclude  the  frozen  condition  to  which  it 
may  be  reduced  in  the  Arctic  regions.  Even  when  we 
take  such  a  fundamental  law  of  nature  as  '  All  substances 
gravitate,3  we  must  mean  by  substance,  material  sub 
stance,  not  including  that  basis  of  heat,  light  and  electrical 
undulations  which  occupies  space  and  possesses  many 
mechanical  properties,  but  not  gravity.  The  proposition 
then  is  really  of  the  form 

Material  substance  =  Material  gravitating  substance. 

To  De  Morgan  is  due  the  remark,  that  we  do  usually 
think  and  argue  in  a  limited  universe  or  sphere  of  notions 
even  when  it  is  not  expressly  stated  f. 

Negative  Propositions. 

In  every  act  of  intellect,  as  we  have  seen,  we  are  en 
gaged  with  a  certain  degree  of  identity  or  difference 
between  certain  things  or  sensations  compared  together. 
Hitherto  I  have  treated  only  of  identities  ;  and  yet 
it  might  seem  that  the  relation  of  difference  must  be 
infinitely  more  common  than  that  of  likeness.  One 
thing  may  resemble  a  great  many  other  things,  but 
then  it  differs  from  all  remaining  things  in  the  world. 
Difference  or  diversity  may  almost  be  said  to  constitute 
life,  being  to  thought  what  motion  is  to  a  river.  The 

f  'Syllabus  of  a  Proposed  System  of  Logic,'  §§  122,  123. 


PROPOSITIONS.  53 

very  perception  of  an  object  involves  its  discrimination 
from  all  other  objects.  But  we  may  nevertheless  be  said 
to  detect  resemblance  as  often  as  we  detect  difference. 
We  cannot,  in  fact,  assert  the  existence  of  a  difference, 
without  at  the  same  time  implying  the  existence  of  an 
agreement. 

If  I  compare  mercury,  for  instance,  with  other  metals, 
and  decide  that  it  is  not  solid,  here  is  a  difference  between 
mercury  and  solid  things,  expressed  in  a  negative  propo 
sition  ;  but  there  must  be  implied,  at  the  same  time,  an 
agreement  between  mercury  and  the  other  substances 
which  are  not  solid.  As  it  is  impossible  in  the  alphabet 
to  separate  the  vowels  from  the  consonants  without  at 
the  same  time  separating  the  consonants  from  the  vowels, 
so  I  cannot  select  as  the  object  of  thought  solid  things, 
without  thereby  throwing  together  into  another  class  all 
things  which  are  not  solid.  The  very  fact  of  not  possess 
ing  a  quality,  constitutes  a  new  quality  or  circumstance 
which  may  equally  be  the  ground  of  judgment  and  classi 
fication.  In  this  point  of  view,  agreement  and  difference 
are  ever  the  two  sides  of  the  same  act  of  intellect,  and  it 
becomes  equally  possible  to  express  the  same  judgment  in 
the  one  or  other  aspect. 

Between  affirmation  and  negation  there  is  accordingly 
a  perfect  balance  or  equilibrium.  Every  affirmative  propo 
sition  implies  a  negative  one,  and  vice  versd.  It  is  even 
a  matter  of  indifference,  in  a  logical  point  of  view,  whether 
a  positive  or  negative  term  be  used  to  denote  a  given 
quality  and  the  class  of  things  possessing  it.  If  the 
ordinary  state  of  man's  body  be  called  good  health,  then  in 
other  circumstances  he  is  said  not  to  l)e  in  good  health  ; 
but  we  might  equally  describe  him  in  the  latter  state  as 
sickly,  and  in  his  normal  condition  he  would  be  not  sickly. 
Animal  and  vegetable  substances  are  now  called  organic, 
so  that  the  other  substances,  forming  an  immensely  greater 


54  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

part  of  the  globe,  are  described  negatively  as  inorganic. 
But  we  might,  with  at  least  equal  logical  correctness, 
have  described  the  preponderating  class  of  substances  as 
mineral,  and  then  vegetable  and  animal  substances  would 
have  been  non-mineral. 

It  is  plain  that  any  positive  term,  and  its  corresponding 
negative  divide  between  them  the  whole  universe  of 
thought :  whatever  does  not  fall  into  one  must  fall  into 
the  other,  by  the  third  fundamental  Law  of  Thought, 
the  Law  of  Duality.  It  follows  at  once  that  there  are 
two  modes  of  representing  a  difference.  Suppose  that 
the  things  or  classes  represented  by  A  and  B  are  found 
to  differ,  we  may  indicate  the  result  of  the  judgment  by 
the  notation  (see  p.  20) 

A-B. 

But  we  may  now  represent  the  same  judgment  by  the 
assertion  that  A  agrees  with  those  things  which  differ  from 
B,  or  that  A  agrees  with  the  not-B's.  Using  our  notation 
for  negative  terms  (see  p.  17),  we  obtain 

A  =  A6 

as  the  expression  of  the  ordinary  negative  proposition. 
Thus  if  we  take  A  to  mean  quicksilver,  and  B  solid,  then 
we  have  the  following  proposition  :— 

Quicksilver  =  Quicksilver  not-solid. 
There  may  also  be  several  other  classes  of  negative 
propositions,  of  which  no  notice  was  taken  in  the  old  logic. 
We  may  have  cases  where  all  A's  are  not-B's,  and  at  the 
same  time  all  not-B's  are  A's ;  there  may,  in  short,  be  a 
simple  identity  between  A  and  not-B^  which  may  be 
expressed  in  the  form 

A=6. 
An  example  of  this  form  would  be 

Conductors  of  electricity  =  non-electrics. 
We  shall  also  frequently  have   to    deal  as  results  of 


PROPOSITIONS.  55 


deduction,  with  simple,  partial,  or  limited  identities  be 
tween  negative  terms,  in  the  forms 

a  =  b,  a  =  ab,  aC  =  bC. 

It  would  be  equally  possible  to  represent  affirmative 
propositions  in  the  negative  form.  Thus  '  Iron  is  solid,' 
might  be  expressed  as  '  Iron  is  not  not-solid,'  or '  Iron  is  not 
fluid';  or,  taking  A  and  6  for  the  terms  'iron,'  and  'not -solid,' 
the  form  would  be 

A -6. 

But  there  are  very  strong  reasons  why  we  should  em 
ploy  all  propositions  in  their  affirmative  form.  All  infer 
ence  proceeds  by  the  substitution  of  equivalents,  and  a 
proposition  expressed  in  the  form  of  an  identity  is  ready 
to  yield  all  its  consequences  in  the  most  direct  manner. 
As  will  be  more  fully  shown,  we  can  infer  in  a  negative 
proposition,  but  not  by  it.  Difference  is  incapable  of 
becoming  the  ground  of  inference  ;  it  is  only  the  implied 
agreement  with  other  differing  objects,  which  admits  of 
deduction  ;  and  it  will  always  be  found  advantageous  to 
employ  propositions  in  the  form  which  exhibits  clearly  all 
the  implied  agreements. 

Conversion  of  Propositions. 

The  old  books  of  logic  contain  many  rules  concerning 
the  conversion  of  propositions,  that  is,  the  transposition 
of  the  subject  and  predicate  in  such  a  way  as  to  obtain 
a  new  proposition  which  will  be  equally  true  with  the 
original.  The  reduction  of  every  proposition  to  the 
form  of  an  identity  renders  all  such  rules  and  processes 
needless.  Identity  is  essentially  reciprocal.  If  the  colour 
of  the  Atlantic  Ocean  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  Pacific 
Ocean,  that  of  the  Pacific  must  be  the  same  as  that  of 
the  Atlantic.  Sodium  chloride  being  identical  with 
common  salt,  common  salt  must  be  identical  with  sodium 


56 


chloride.  If  the  number  of  windows  in  Salisbury 
Cathedral  equals,  the  number  of  days  in  the  year,  the 
number  of  days  in  the  year  must  equal  the  number  of 
the  windows.  Lord  Chesterfield  was  not  wrong  when 
he  said,  '  I  will  give  anybody  their  choice  of  these  two 
truths,  which  amount  to  the  same  thing  ;  He  who  loves 
himself  best  is  the  honestest  man  ;  or,  The  honestest  man 
loves  himself  best  * .'  Scotus  Erigena  exactly  expresses  this 
reciprocal  character  of  identity  in  saying,  '  There  are  not 
two  studies,  one  of  philosophy  and  the  other  of  religion ; 
true  philosophy  is  true  religion,  and  true  religion  is  true 
philosophy.' 

A  mathematician  would  not  think  it  worth  mention 
that  if  x  =  y  then  also  y  =  x.  He  would  not  consider 
these  to  be  two  equations  at  all,  but  one  same  equation 
accidentally  written  in  two  different  manners.  In  written 
symbols  one  of  two  names  must  come  first,  and  the  other 
second,  and  a  like  succession  must  perhaps  be  observed  in 
our  thoughts :  but  in  the  relation  of  identity  there  is  no 
need  for  succession  in  order  ;  each  is  simultaneously  equal 
and  identical  to  the  other.  These  remarks  will  hold  true 
equally  of  logical  and  mathematical  identity;  so  that  I 
shall  consider  the  two  forms 

A  =  B  and  B  =  A 

to  express  exactly  the  same  identity  differently  written. 
All  need  for  rules  of  conversion  disappears,  and  there 
will  be  no  single  proposition  in  the  system  which  may 
not  be  written  with  either  term  foremost.  Thus  A  =  AB 
is  the  same  as  AB  =  A,  AB  =  AC  as  AC  =  AB,  and  so  on. 

The  same  remarks  are  partially  true  of  differences  or 
inequalities,  which  are  also  reciprocal  to  the  extent  that 
one  thing  cannot  differ  from  a  second  without  the  second 
differing  from  the  first.  Mars  differs  in  colour  from 

£  Chesterfield's  Letters,  8vo,  1744;  vol.  i.  p.  302. 


PROPOSITIONS.  57 


Venus,  and  Venus  must  differ  from  Mars.  The  Earth 
diifers  from  Jupiter  in  density ;  therefore  Jupiter  must 
differ  from  the  .Earth.  Speaking  generally,  if  A  ~  B  we 
shall  also  have  B  -»-  A,  and  these  two  forms  may  be  con 
sidered  expressions  of  the  same  difference.  But  the 
reader  will  notice  that  the  relation  of  differing  things 
is  not  wholly  reciprocal.  The  density  of  Jupiter  does 
not  differ  from  that  of  the  Earth  in  the  same  way  that 
that  of  the  Earth  differs  from  that  of  Jupiter.  The  change 
of  sensation  which  we  experience  in  passing  from  Venus 
to  Mars  is  not  the  same  as  what  we  experience  in  passing 
back  to  Venus,  but  just  the  opposite  in  nature.  The 
colour  of  the  sky  is  lighter  than  that  of  the  ocean ; 
therefore  that  of  the  ocean  cannot  be  lighter  than  that 
of  the  sky,  but  darker.  In  these  and  all  similar  cases 
we  gain  a  notion  of  direction  or  character  of  change, 
and  results  of  immense  importance  may  be  shown  to 
rest  on  this  notion.  For  the  present  we  shall  be 
concerned  with  the  mere  fact  of  identity  existing  or 
not  existing. 


Twofold  Interpretation  of  Propositions. 

Terms,  as  we  have  seen  (p.  31),  may  have  a  meaning 
either  in  extension  or  intension ;  and  according  as  one 
or  the  other  meaning  is  attributed  to  the  terms  of  a 
proposition,  so  may  a  different  interpretation  be  assigned 
to  the  proposition  itself:  When  the  terms  are  abstract 
we  must  read  them  in  intension,  and  a  proposition  con 
necting  such  terms  must  denote  the  identity  or  non- 
identity  of  the  qualities  respectively  denoted  by  the 
terms.  Thus  if  we  say 

Equality  =  Identity  of  magnitude, 
the  assertion  means  that  the  circumstance  of  being  equal 


58  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

exactly  corresponds  with  the  circumstance  of  being  iden 
tical  in  magnitude.     Similarly  in 

Opacity  =  Incapability  of  transmitting  light, 
the   quality  of  being  incapable  of  transmitting  light   is 
declared  to  be  the  same  as  the  intended  meaning  of  the 

word  opacity. 

When  general  names  form  the  terms  of  a  proposition 
we  may  apply  a  double  interpretation.     Thus 

Exogens  =  Dicotyledons 

means  either  that  the  qualities  which  belong  to  all  exo- 
gens  are  the  same  as  those  which  belong  to  all  dicotyle 
dons,  or  else  that  every  individual  falling  under  one  name 
falls  equally  under  the  other.  Hence  it  may  be  said  that 
there  are  two  distinct  fields  of  logical  thought.  We  may 
argue  either  by  the  qualitative  meaning  of  names  or 
by  the  quantitative,  that  is,  the  extensive  meaning. 
Every  argument  involving  concrete  plural  terms  might 
be  converted  into  one  involving  only  abstract  singular 
terms,  and  vice  versa.  But  there  are  many  reasons  for 
believing  that  the  intensive  or  qualitative  form  of  reason 
ing  is  the  primary  and  fundamental  one.  It  is  sufficient 
to  point  out  that  we  may  use  abstract  terms  which  contain 
no  reference  to  an  extensive  meaning ;  and  when  there 
is  a  mode  which  we  must  sometimes  and  may  always 
adopt,  it  is  higher  in  importance  than  a  mode  which  we 
never  need  adopt  necessarily. 


CHAPTER   IV. 

DEDUCTIVE    REASONING. 

THE  general  principle  of  inference  having  been  ex 
plained  in  the  previous  chapters,  and  a  suitable  system 
of  symbols  provided,  we  have  now  before  us  the  com 
paratively  easy  task  of  tracing  out  the  most  common  and 
important  forms  of  deductive  reasoning.  The  general 
problem  of  deduction  is  as  follows  : — From  one  or  more 
propositions  called  premises  to  draw  such  other  proposi 
tions  as  ivill  necessarily  be  true  when  the  premises  are 
true.  By  deduction  we  investigate  and  unfold  the  in 
formation  contained  in  the  premises ;  and  this  we  can  do 
by  one  single  rule — For  any  term  occurring  in  any  pro 
position  or  expression  substitute  the  expression  which  is 
asserted  in  any  premise  to  be  identical  with  it.  To  obtain 
certain  deductions,  especially  those  involving  negative 
conclusions,  we  shall  require  to  bring  into  use  the 
second  and  third  Laws  of  Thought,  and  the  process  of 
reasoning  will  then  be  called  Indirect  Deduction.  In  the 
present  chapter,  however,  I  shall  confine  my  attention  to 
those  results  which  can  be  obtained  by  the  process  of 
Direct  Deduction,  that  is,  by  applying  to  the  premises 
themselves  the  rule  of  substitution.  It  will  be  found 
that  we  can  combine  in  one  harmonious  system,  not  only 
the  various  moods  of  the  ancient  syllogism,  but  a  great 
number  of  equally  important  forms  of  reasoning,  which  had 
no  distinct  place  in  the  old  logic.  We  can  at  the  same 
time  dispense  entirely  with  the  elaborate  apparatus  of 
logical  rules  and  mnemonic  lines,  which  were  requisite 


GO  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

so  long  as  the  vital  principle  of  reasoning  was  not  clearly 
expressed. 

Immediate  Inference. 

Probably  the  simplest  of  all  forms  of  inference  is  that 
which  has  been  called  Immediate  Inference,  because  it 
can  be  performed  upon  a  single  proposition.  It  consists 
in  joining  an  adjective,  or  other  qualifying  clause  of  the 
same  nature,  to  both  sides  of  an  identity,  and  asserting 
the  equivalence  of  the  terms  thus  produced.  For  instance, 
since 

Conductors  of  electricity  =  Non-electrics, 
it  follows  that 

Liquid  conductors  of  electricity  =  Liquid  non-electrics. 

If  we  suppose  that 

Plants  =  Bodies  decomposing  carbonic  acid, 

it  follows  that 

Microscopic  plants  =  Microscopic  bodies  decomposing 

carbonic  acid. 
In  general  symbols,  from  the  identity 

A  =  B 
we  can  infer  the  identity 

AC=BC. 

This  is  but  a  case  of  plain  substitution  ;  for  by  the  first 
Law  of  Thought  it  must  be  admitted  that 


and  if  in  the  second  side  of  this  identity  we  substitute 
for  A  its  equivalent  B,  we  obtain 

AC  =  BC. 

In  like  manner  from  the  partial  identity 

A  =  AB 

we  may  obtain 

AC  =  ABC 

by  an  exactly  similar  form  of  substitution  ;  and  in  every 


DEDUCTIVE  REASONING.  61 

other  case  the  rule  will  be  found  capable  of  verification  by 
the  principle  of  inference.  The  process  when  performed  as 
here  described  will  be  found  free  from  the  liability  to 
error  which  I  have  shown  a  to  exist  in  Immediate  Inference 
by  added  Determinants,  as  described  by  Dr.  Thomson b. 

Inference  with  Tivo  Simple  Identities. 

One  of  the  most  common  forms  of  inference,  and  one  to 
which  I  shall  especially  direct  attention,  is  practised  with 
two  simple  identities.     From  the  two    statements   that 
'London  is  the  capital  of  England'  and  'London  is  the 
most  populous  city  in  the  world/  we  instantaneously  draw 
the  conclusion  that  '  The  capital  of  England  is  the  most 
populous  city  in  the  world/     Similarly,  from  the  identities 
Hydrogen  =  Substance  of  least  density 
Hydrogen  =  Substance  of  least  atomic  weight, 
we  infer 

Substance  of  least  density  =  Substance  of  least  atomic 

weight. 

The  general  form  of  the  argument  is  exhibited  in  the 
symbols 

B  =  A  (i) 

B=C  (2) 

hence  A  =  C.  (3) 

We  may  describe  the  result  by  saying  that  terms 
identical  with  the  same  term  are  identical  with  each 
other ;  and  it  is  impossible  to  overlook  the  analogy  to  the 
first  axiom  of  Euclid  that  '  things  equal  to  the  same  thing 
are  equal  to  each  other.'  It  has  been  very  commonly  sup 
posed  that  this  was  a  fundamental  principle  of  thought 
incapable  of  reduction  to  anything  simpler.  But  I  enter 
tain  no  doubt  that  this  form  of  reasoning  is  only  one  case 

a  '  Elementary  Lessons  in  Logic,'  p.  86. 
b  <  Outline  of  the  Laws  of  Thought,'  §  87. 


G2  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

of  the  general  rule  of  inference.  We  have  two  propo 
sitions,  A  =  B  and  B  =  C,  and  we  may  for  a  moment  con 
sider  the  second  one  as  affirming  a  truth  concerning  B 
while  the  former  one  informs  us  that  B  is  identical  with 
A  ;  hence  by  substitution  we  may  affirm  the  same  truth 
of  A.  It  happens  in  this  particular  form  that  the  truth 
affirmed  is  identity  to  C,  and  we  might,  if  we  had  preferred, 
have  considered  the  substitution  as  made  by  means  of  the 
second  identity  in  the  first.  Having  two  identities  we 
have  a  choice  of  the  mode  in  which  we  will  make  the 
substitution,  though  the  result  is  exactly  the  same  in 
either  case. 

Now  compare  the  three  following  formulas 

(1)  A  =  B  =  C  hence  A^C 

(2)  A  =  B-C  hence  A-C 

(3)  A  -»-  B  **  C,  no  inference. 

In  the  second  formula  we  have  an  identity  and  a  differ 
ence,  and  we  are  able  to  infer  a  difference ;  in  the  third 
we  have  two  differences  and  are  unable  to  make  any 
inference  at  all.  Because  A  and  C  both  differ  from  B,  we 
cannot  tell  whether  they  will  or  will  not  differ  from  each 
other.  The  flowers  and  leaves  of  a  plant  may  both  differ 
in  colour  from  the  earth  in  which  the  plant  grows,  and 
yet  they  may  differ  from  each  other  ;  in  other  cases  the 
leaves  and  stem  may  both  differ  from  the  soil  and  yet  agree 
with  each  other.  Where  we  have  difference  only  we  can 
make  no  inference  ;  where  we  have  identity  we  can  infer. 
This  fact  gives  great  countenance  to  my  assertion  that 
inference  proceeds  always  through  an  identity,  but  may 
be  indifferently  effected  in  a  difference  or  an  identity. 

Deferring  a  more  complete  discussion  of  this  point,  I 
will  only  mention  now  that  arguments  from  double 
identity  occur  very  frequently,  and  are  usually  taken 
for  granted  owing  to  their  extreme  simplicity.  In  the 
equivalency  of  words  it  must  be  constantly  employed.  If 


DEDUCTIVE  REASONING.  G3 


the  ancient  Greek  ^aX/co?  is  our  copper,  tlien  it  must  be 
the  French  cuivre,  the  German  kupfer,  the  Latin  cuprum, 
because  ^these  are  words,  in  one  sense  at  least,  equivalent 
to  copper.  Whenever  we  can  give  two  definitions  or 
expressions  for  the  same  term,  the  formula  applies  ;  thus 
Senior  defined  wealth  as  '  whatever  is  transferable,  limited 
in  supply,  and  productive  of  pleasure  or  preventive  of 
pain  ;'  it  is  also  equivalent  to  '  whatever  has  value  in 
exchange  ;'  hence  obviously  '  Whatever  has  value  in  ex 
change'  =  '  Whatever  is  transferable,  limited  in  supply,  and 
productive  of  pleasure  or  preventive  of  pain/  Two  ex 
pressions  for  the  same  term  are  often  given  in  the  same 
sentence,  and  their  equivalency  implied.  Thus  Thomson 
and  Tait  sayc,  '  The  naturalist  may  be  content  to  know 
matter  as  that  which  can  be  perceived  by  the  senses,  or  as 
that  which  tcan  be  acted  upon  by  or  can  exert  force.'  I 
take  this  to  mean  — 

Matter  =  what  can  be  perceived  by  the  senses  ; 

Matter  -.  what  can  be  acted  upon  by  or  can  exert  force. 
For  the  term  '  matter'  in  either  of  these  identities  we 
may  substitute  its  equivalent  given  in  the  other  definition. 
Elsewhere  they  often  employ  sentences  of  the  form  exem- 
plified'in  the  following  d;  '  The  integral  curvature,  or  whole 
change  of  direction  of  an  arc  of  a  plane  curve,  is  the  angle 
through  which  the  tangent  has  turned  as  we  pass  from 
one  extremity  to  the  other.'  This  sentence  is  certainly  of 
the  form  — 

The  integral  curvature  =  the  whole  change  of  direction, 
&c.  =  the  angle  through  which  the  tangent  has 
turned,  &c. 

Disguised  cases  of  the  same  kind  of  inference  occur 
throughout  ah1  sciences,  and  a  remarkable  instance  is 
found  in  algebraic  geometry.  Mathematicians  readily 

c  '  Treatise  on  Natural  Philosophy,'  vol.  i.  p.  1  6  1  . 
d  Ibid.  vol.  i.  p.  6. 


s 


G4  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

^7~tuT^ery  equation  of  the  form  y  = 
equivalent  to  or  represented  by  a  straight  line  ;  it  is  also 
easily  proved  that  the  same  equation  is  equivalent  to  one 
of  the  form  Az  +  B?/  +  C  =  o,  and  vice  versa.  Hence  it 
follows  that  every  equation  of  the  first  degree  is  equivalent 
to  or  represents  a  straight  line  e. 

Inference  with  a  Simple  and.  a  Partial  Identity. 

A  form  of  reasoning  somewhat  different  from  that  last 
considered  consists  in  inference  between  a  simple  and  a 
partial  identity.  If  we  have  two  propositions  of  the 

form 

A  =  B, 

B  =  BC, 

we  may  then  substitute  for  B  in  either  proposition  its 
equivalent  in  the  other,  getting  in  both  cases  A  —  BC  ; 
in  this  we  may  if  we  like  make  a  second  substitution  for 

B,  getting 

A  =  AC. 

Thus,  since  'Mont  Blanc  is  the  highest  mountain  in 
Europe,  and  Mont  Blanc  is  deeply  covered  with  snow/  we 
infer  by  an  obvious  substitution  that  *  The  highest  moun 
tain  in  Europe  is  deeply  covered  with  snow.'  These  pro 
positions  when  rigorously  stated  fall  into  the  form  above 
exhibited. 

This  form  of  inference  is  constantly  employed  when  for 
a  term  we  substitute  its  definition,  or  vice  versa.  The 
very  purpose  of  a  definition  is  in  fact  to  allow  a  single 
term  to  be  employed  in  place  of  a  long  descriptive  phrase. 
Thus  when  we  say  '  Circles  are  curves  of  the  second 
degree,'  we  may  substitute  the  definition  of  a  circle, 
getting  '  A  plane  curve,  all  points  of  whose  perimeter  are 
at  equal  distances  from  a  certain  fixed  point,  is  a  curve  of 

c  Todhunter's  '  Plane  Co-ordinate  Geometry,'  chap.  ii.  pp.  11-14. 


DEDUCTIVE  REASONING.  65 

the  second  degree.'  The  real  forms  of  the  propositions 
here  given  are  exactly  those  shown  in  the  symbolic  state 
ment,  but  in  this  and  many  other  cases  it  will  be  sufficient 
to  state  them  in  ordinary  elliptical  language  for  sake  of 
brevity.  In  scientific  treatises  a  term  and  its  definition 
are  often  both  given  in  the  same  sentence,  as  in  '  The 
weight  of  a  body  in  any  given  locality,  or  the  force  with 
which  the  earth  attracts  it,  is  proportional  to  its  mass.' 
The  conjunction  or  in  this  statement  gives  the  force  of 
equivalence  to  the  parenthetic  definition,  so  that  the 
propositions  really  are 

Weight  of  a  body  =  force  with  which  the  earth  at 
tracts  it. 

Weight  of  a  body  =  weight,  &c.  proportional  to  its 
mass. 

A  slightly  different  case  of  inference  consists  in  sub 
stituting  in  a  proposition  of  the  form  A  =  AB  a  defi 
nition  of  the  term  B.  Thus  from  A  =  AB  and  B  =  C 
we  get  A  =  AC.  For  instance,  we  may  say  that '  Metals 
are  elements'  and  'Elements  are  incapable  of  decompo 
sition.' 

Metal  =  metal  element. 

Element  =  what  is  incapable  of  decomposition. 

Hence 

Metal  =  metal  incapable  of  decomposition. 
It  is  almost  needless  to  point  out  that  the  form  of  these 
arguments  would  not  suffer  any  real  modification  if  some 
of  the  terms  happened  to  be  negative  ;  indeed  in  the  last 
example  *  incapable  of  decomposition '  may  be  treated  as 
a  negative  term.  Taking 

A  =  metal 

B  =  element 

C  =  what  is  capable  of  decomposition 
c  =~what  is  incapable  of  decomposition  (p.  17); 


66  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

the  propositions  are  of  the  form 

A  =  AB 

B  =  c; 
whence,  by  substitution, 

A  =  Ac. 


Inference  of  a  Partial  from  Two  Partial  Identities. 

However  common  be  the  cases  of  inference  already 
noticed,  there  is  a  form  occurring  almost  more  frequently, 
and  which  deserves  much  attention  because  it  occupied  a 
prominent  place  in  the  ancient  syllogistic  system.  That 
system  strangely  overlooked  all  the  kinds  of  argument  we 
have  as  yet  considered,  and  selected  as  the  type  of  all 
reasoning  one  which  employs  two  partial  identities  as 
premises.  Thus  from  the  propositions 

Sodium  is  a  metal  (i) 

Metals  conduct  electricity,  (2,) 

we  may  conclude  that 

Sodium  conducts  electricity.  (3) 

Taking  A,  B,  C,  respectively  to  represent  the  three  terms, 

the  premises  are  of  the  form 

A  =  AB  (i) 

B  =  BC.  (2) 

Now  for  B  in  (i)  we  can  substitute  its  description  as 

given  in  (2),  obtaining 

A  =  ABC,  (3) 

or,  in  words,  from 

Sodium  =  sodium  metal  (i) 

Metal  =  metal  conducting  electricity,  (2) 

we  infer 

Sodium  =  sodium  metal  conducting  electricity,  (3) 
which  in  the  elliptical  language  of  common  life  becomes 

'  Sodium  conducts  electricitv.' 


DEDUCTIVE   REASONING.  67 


The  above  is  a  syllogism  in  the  mood  called  Barbara f 
in  the  truly  barbarous  language  of  ancient  logicians  ;  and 
the  first  figure  of  the  syllogism  alone  contained  three  other 
moods  which  were  esteemed  distinct  forms  of  argument. 
But  it  is  worthy  of  notice  that  without  any  real  change 
in  our  form  of  inference  we  readily  include  these  three 
other  moods  under  it.  The  negative  mood  Celarent  will 
be  represented  by  the  example 

Neptune  is  a  planet  (i) 

No  planet  has  retrograde  motion,  (2) 

hence        Neptune  has  riot  retrograde  motion.          (3) 

If  we  put  A  for  Neptune,  B  for  planet,and  C  for  '  having 
retrograde  motion,'  then  by  the  corresponding  negative 
term  c,  we  denote  '  not  having  retrograde  motion.'  The 
premises  now  fall  into  the  form 

A  =  AB  (i) 

B  =  Be,  (2) 

and  by  substitution  for  B,  exactly  as  before,  we  obtain 

A  =  ABc.  (3) 

What  is  called  in  the  old  logic  a  particular  conclusion 
may  be  deduced  without  any  real  variation  in  the  sym 
bols.  Particular  quantity  is  indicated,  as  before  mentioned 
(p.  49),  by  joining  to  the  term  an  indefinite  adjective  of 
quantity,  such  as  some,  a  part,  certain,  &c.,  meaning  that 
an  unknown  part  of  the  term  enters  into  the  proposition 
as  subject.  Considerable  doubt  and  ambiguity  arise  out 
of  the  question  whether  the  part  may  not  in  some  cases 
be  the  whole,  and  in  the  syllogism  at  least  it  must  be 
understood  in  this  senses.  Now  if  we  take  a  letter  to 
represent  this  indefinite  part,  we  need  make  no  change  in 

f  An  explanation  of  this  and  other  technical  terms  of  the  old  logic 
will  be  found  in  my  'Elementary  Lessons  in  Logic,'  Second  Ed.  1871. 
Macmillan  &  Co. 

f  'Elementary  Lessons  in  Logic,'  pp.  67,  79. 

F    2 


68  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

our  formulae  to  express  either  of  the  syllogisms  Darii  or 
Ferio.     Consider  the  example — 

Some  metals  are  of  less  density  than  water          (i) 
All  bodies  of  less  density  than  water  will  float 

upon  its  surface  (2) 

Some  metals  will  float  upon  its  surface,  (3) 

Let      A  =  some  metals 

B  =  body  of  less  density  than  water 
C  =  floating  on  the  surface  of  water ; 
then  the  propositions  are  evidently  as  before, 

A  =  AB  (i) 

B  =  BC;  (2) 

hence  A  =  ABC.  (3) 

Thus  the  syllogism  Darii  does  not  really  differ  from  Bar 
bara.     If  the  reader  prefer  it,  we  can  readily  employ  a 
distinct  symbol  for  the  indefinite  sign  of  quantity. 
Let  P  =  some 

Q  =  metal, 

B  and  C  having  the  same  meanings  as  before.     Then  the 
premises  become 

PQ  ==  PQB  (i) 

B  =  BC;  (2) 

hence,  by  substitution,  as  before, 

PQ  ==  PQBC.  (3) 

Except  that  the  formulae  look  a  little  more  complicated 
there  is  no  difference  whatever. 

The  mood  Ferio  is  of  exactly  the  same  character  as 
Darii  or  Barbara,  except  that  it  involves  the  use  of  a 
negative  term.  Take  the  example — 

Bodies  which  are  equally  elastic  in  all  directions  do 

not  doubly  refract  light, 

Some  crystals  are  bodies  equally  elastic  in  all  direc 
tions;   therefore   some   crystals   do  not  doubly 
refract  light. 
Assigning  the  letters  as  follows — 


DEDUCTIVE  REASONING.  69 

A  =  some  crystals. 

B  =  bodies  equally  elastic  in  all  directions 

C  =  doubly  refracting  light 

c  =  not  doubly  refracting  light. 

Our  argument  is  of  the  same  form  as  before,  and  may 
be  concisely  stated  in  one  line 

A  =  AB  =  ABc. 
If  we  take  PQ  for  the  indefinite  some  crystals,  we  have 

PQ  =  PQB  =  PQBc. 

The  only  difference  is  that  the  negative  term  c  occurs 
instead  of  C  in  the  mood  Darii  (p.  68). 

On  the  Ellipsis  of  Terms  in  Partial  Identities-. 

The  reader  will  probably  have  noticed  that  the  conclu 
sion  which  we  obtain  from  premises  is  often  more  full 
than  that  drawn  by  the  old  Aristotelian  processes.  Thus 
from  '  Sodium  is  a  metal/  and  '  Metals  conduct  electricity,' 
we  inferred  (p.  66)  that  '  Sodium  =  sodium  metal,  con 
ducting  electricity/  whereas  the  old  logic  simply  concludes 
that  '  Sodium  conducts  electricity.'  Symbolically,  from 
A  =  AB,  and  B  =  BC,  we  get  A  =  ABC,  whereas  the  old 
logic  gets  at  the  most  A  =  AC.  It  is  therefore  well  to 
show  that  without  employing  any  other  principles  of 
inference  than  those  already  described,  we  may  infer 
A  =  AC  from  A  =  ABO,  though  we  cannot  infer  the 
latter  more  full  and  accurate  result  from  the  former. 
We  may  show  this  most  simply  as  follows  : — 

By  the  first  law  of  thought  it  is  evident  that 

AA  =  AA  ; 

and  if  we  have  given  the  proposition  A  =  ABC,  we  may 
substitute  for  both  the  A's  in  the  second  side  of  the  above, 
obtaining 

AA  =  ABC  .  ABC. 
But  from  the  property  of  logical  symbols  expressed  in  the 


70  THE  PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

Law  of  Simplicity  (p.  39)  some  of  the  repeated  letters  may 
be  made  to  coalesce,  and  we  have 

A  =  ABC  .  C. 

Substituting  again  for  ABC  its  equivalent  A,  we  obtain 

A  =  AC, 
the  desired  result. 

By  a  similar  process  of  reasoning  it  may  be  shown  that 
we  can  always  drop  out  any  term  appearing  in  one  member 
of  a  proposition,  provided  that  we  substitute  for  it  the 
whole  of  the  other  member.  This  process  was  described 
in  my  first  logical  Essay h,  as  Intrinsic  Elimination,  but  it 
might  perhaps  be  better  entitled  the  Ellipsis  of  Terms. 
It  enables  us  to  get  rid  of  needless  terms  by  strict  sub- 
stitutive  reasoning. 

Inference  of  a  Simple  from  Two  Partial  Identities. 

Two  terms  may  be  connected  together  by  two  partial 
identities  in  yet  another  manner,  and  a  case  of  inference 
then  arises  which  is  of  the  highest  importance.  In  the 
two  premises 

A  =  AB  (i) 

B  -  AB,  (2) 

the  second  member  of  each  is  the  same ;  so  that  we  can 
by  obvious  substitution  obtain 

A  =  B. 

Thus  in  plain  geometry  we  readily  prove  that  '  Every 
equilateral  triangle  is  also  an  equiangular  triangle,'  and 
we  can  with  equal  ease  prove  that  '  Every  equiangular 
triangle  is  an  equilateral  triangle.'     Thence  by  substitu 
tion,  as  explained  above,  we  pass  to  the  simple  identity- 
Equilateral  triangle  =  equiangular  triangle. 
We  thus  prove  that  one  class    of  triangles    is    entirely 
identical  with  another  class ;    that  is  to  say,  they  differ 
only  m  our  way  of  naming  and  regarding  them. 
h  '  l\uc  Logic ,'  p.  19. 


DEDUCTIVE  REASONING.  71 

The  great  importance  of  this  process  of  inference  arises 
from  the  fact  that  the  conclusion  is  more  simple  and 
general  than  either  of  the  premises,  and  contains  as  much 
information  as  both  of  them  put  together.  It  is  on  this 
account  constantly  employed  in  inductive  investigation, 
as  will  afterwards  be  more  fully  explained,  and  it  is  the 
natural  mode  by  which  we  arrive  at  a  conviction  of  the 
truth  of  simple  identities  as  existing  between  classes  of 
numerous  objects. 

Inference  of  a  Limited  from  Two  Partial  Identities. 

We  have  just  considered  arguments  which  are  of  the 
type  treated  by  Aristotle  in  the  first  figure  of  the 
syllogism.  But  there  are  two  other  types  of  argument 
which  employ  a  pair  of  partial  identities.  If  our  premises 
are,  as  shown  in  these  symbols, 

B  =  AB  (i) 

B  =  CB,  (2) 

we  may  substitute  for  B  either  by  (i)  in  (2)  or  by  (2)  in 
(i),  and  by  both  modes  we  obtain  the  conclusion 

AB  =  CB,  (3) 

a  proposition  of  the  kind  which  we  have  called  a  limited 
identity  (p.  51).     Thus,  for  example, 

Potassium  =  potassium  metal  (i) 

Potassium  =  potassium  floating  on  water  ;  (2) 

hence 

Potassium  metal  =  potassium  floating  on  water.  (3) 
Now  this  is  really  a  syllogism  of  the  mood  Darapti  in  the 
third  figure,  except  that  we  obtain  a  conclusion  of  a  much 
more  exact  character  than  the  old  syllogism  gives.  From 
the  premises  '  Potassium  is  a  metal '  and  '  Potassium  floats 
on  water,'  Aristotle  would  have  inferred  that  '  Some 
metals  float  on  water.'  But  if  inquiry  were  made  what 
the  some  metals  are,  the  answer  would  certainly  be  '  Metal 
which  is  potassium/  Hence  Aristotle's  conclusion  simply 


72  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

leaves  out  some  of  the  information  afforded  in  the  premises ; 
it  even  leaves  us  open  to  interpret  the  some  metals  in  a 
wider  sense  than  we  are  warranted  in  doing.  From  these 
distinct  defects  of  the  syllogism  the  process  of  substitution 
is  free,  and  it  only  incurs  the  possible  objection  of  being 
tediously  minute  and  accurate. 

Miscellaneous  Forms  of  Deductive  Inference. 

The  more  simple  and  common  forms  of  deductive 
reasoning  having  been  exhibited  and  demonstrated  on 
the  principle  of  substitution,  there  remain  many,  in  fact 
an  indefinite  number,  which  may  be  explained  with  nearly 
equal  ease.  Such  as  involve  the  use  of  disjunctive  propo 
sitions  will  be  deferred  to  a  later  chapter,  and  several  of 
the  syllogistic  moods  which  include  negative  terms  will  be 
more  conveniently  treated  after  we  have  introduced  the 
symbolic  use  of  the  second  and  third  laws  of  thought. 

We  sometimes  meet  with  a  chain  of  propositions  which 
allow  of  repeated  substitution  and  form  an  argument  called 
in  the  old  logic  a  Sorites.    Take,  for  instance,  the  premises 
Iron  is  a  metal  (i) 

Metals  are  good  conductors  of  electricity  (2) 

Good  conductors  of  electricity  are  useful  for 

telegraphic  purposes.  (3) 

It  obviously  follows  that 

Iron  is  useful  for  telegraphic  purposes.  (4) 

Now  if  we  take  our  letters  thus — 

A  =  Iron,        B  =  metal,       C  =  good   conductor    of 
electricity,    D  =  useful  for  telegraphic  purposes, 
the  premises  will  assume  the  form — 

A  =  AB  (i) 

B  =  BC  (a) 

C  =  CD  (3) 

For  B  in  (i)  we  can  substitute  its  equivalent  in  (2),  and 


DEDUCTIVE  REASONING.  73 

for  C  in  (2)  we  can  substitute  its  equivalent  in  (3).     We 
shall  obtain  as  an  intermediate  result, 

A  =  ABC, 
and  from  this  the  complete  conclusion 

A  =  ABCD.  (4) 

The  full  interpretation  is  that  Iron  is  iron,  metal,  good 
conductor  of  electricity,  use/id  for  telegraphic  purposes, 
which  is  abridged  in  common  language  by  the  ellipsis  of 
the  circumstances  which  are  not  of  immediate  importance. 
Instead  of  all  the  propositions  being  of  one  type,  as  in 
the  last  example,  we  may  have  a  series  of  premises  of 
various  character  ;  for  instance 

Common  salt  is  sodium  chloride  (i) 

Sodium  chloride  crystallizes  in  a  cubical  form      (2) 
What  crystallizes  in  a  cubical  form  does  not 

possess  the  power  of  double  refraction  ;        (3) 
it  will  follow  that 

Common  salt  does  not  possess  the  power  of 

double  refraction.  (4) 

Taking  our  letter-terms  thus — 
A  =  Common  salt, 
B  =  Sodium  chloride, 
C  =  Crystallizing  in  a  cubical  form, 
D  =  Possessing  the  power  of  double  refraction, 
we  may  state  the  premises  in  the  form 

A  =  B,  (i) 

B  =  BC,  (2) 

C  =  Cd.  (3) 

Substituting  by  (2)  in  (i)  and  by  (3)  in  (2)  we  obtain 

A  =  BCd,  (4) 

which  is  a  more  precise  version  of  the  common  conclusion. 
We  often  meet  with  a  series  of  propositions  describing 
the  qualities  or  circumstances  of  one  same  thing,  and  we 
may  if  we  like  combine  them  all  into  one  proposition 
by  the  process  of  substitution.  This  case  is,  in  fact, 


74  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

that  which  Archbishop  Thomson  has  called  '  immediate 
inference  by  the  sum  of  several  predicates,'  and  his 
example  will  serve  my  purpose  well1.  He  describes 
copper  as  'A  metal,  of  a  red  colour,  and  disagreeable 
smell  and  taste,  all  the  preparations  of  which  are 
poisonous,  which  is  highly  malleable,  ductile,  and  tena 
cious,  with  a  specific  gravity  of  about  8.83.'  If  we 
assign  the  letter  A  to  copper,  and  the  succeeding  letters 
of  the  alphabet  in  succession  to  the  series  of  predicates, 
we  have  nine  distinct  statements,  of  the  form 

A  =  AB(i)     A  =  AC(2)     A  =  AD(3) A  =  AK  (9). 

We  can  readily  combine  these  propositions  into  one  bv 
substituting  for  A  in  the  second  side  of  (i)  its  expression 
in  (2).  We  thus  get 

A  -  ABC, 

and  by  repeating  the  process  over  and  over  again  we 
obtain  the  single  proposition 

A  =  ABCDEFGHIJK. 

But  Dr.  Thomson  is  mistaken  in  supposing  that  we  can 
obtain  in  this  manner  a  definition  of  copper.  Strictly 
speaking,  the  above  proposition  is  only  a  description  of 
copper,  and  all  the  ordinary  descriptions  of  substances 
in  scientific  works  may  be  summed  up  in  this  form. 
Thus  we  may  assert  of  the  organic  substances  called 
Paraffins  that  they  are  all  saturated  hydrocarbons,  in 
capable  of  uniting  with  other  substances,  produced  by 
heating  the  alcoholic  iodides  with  zinc,  and  so  on.  It 
may  be  shown  that  no  amount  of  ordinary  description 
can  be  equivalent  to  definition. 

Fallacies. 

I  have  hitherto  been  engaged  in  showing  that  all  the 
forms  of  reasoning  of  the  old   syllogistic   logic,  and  an 
Jfimte   number  of  other   forms   in   addition,   may  be 
'  Au  Outline  of  the  Laws  of  Thought/  Fifth  Ed.  p.  161. 


DEDUCTIVE  REASONING.  75 

readily  and  clearly  explained  on  the  single  principle  of 
substitution.  It  is  now  desirable  to  show  that  the  same 
principle  would  prevent  us  falling  into  fallacies.  So  long 
as  we  exactly  observe  the  one  rule  of  substitution  of 
equivalents  it  will  be  impossible  to  commit  a  paralogism, 
or  to  break  any  one  of  the  elaborate  rules  of  the  ancient 
system.  One  rule  is  thus  proved  to  be  as  powerful  as 
the  six,  eight,  or  more  rules  by  which  the  correctness  of 
syllogistic  reasoning  was  guarded. 

It  was  a  fundamental  rule,  for  instance,  that  two  nega 
tive  premises  could  give  no  conclusion.     If  we  take  the 
propositions- 
Granite  is  not  a  sedimentary  rock,  (i) 
Basalt  is  not  a  sedimentary  rock,                     (2) 
we  ought  not  to  be  able  to  draw  any  inference  concerning 
the  relation   of  granite   and  basalt.     Taking  our  letter- 
terms  thus 

A  =  granite 
B  =  sedimentary  rock 
C  =  basalt, 
the  premises  may  be  expressed  in  the  form 

A  -  B  (i) 

C  -  B.  (2) 

We  have  in  this  form  two  statements  of  difference ;  but 
the  principle  of  inference  can  only  work  with  a  statement 
of  agreement  or  identity  (p.  62).  Thus  our  rule  gives 
us  no  power  whatever  of  drawing  any  inference. 

It  is  to  be  remembered,  indeed,  that  we  claim  the 
power  of  always  turning  a  negative  proposition  into  an 
affirmative  one ;  and  it  might  seem  that  the  old  rule  of 
negative  premises  would  be  thus  circumvented.  Let  us 
try.  The  premises  (i)  and  (2)  when  affirmatively  stated 
(see  p.  54),  will  take  the  form 

A  =  A6  (i) 

C  =  06.  (2) 


76  THE   PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

The  reader  will  find  it  impossible  by  the  rule  of  substitu 
tion  to  discover  a  relation  between  A  and  C.  Three  terms 
occur  in  these  premises,  namely  A,  b,  and  C  ;  but  they 
are  so  combined  that  no  term  occurring  in  one  has  its 
exact  equivalent  stated  in  the  other.  No  substitution 
can  therefore  be  made,  and  the  principle  holds  true. 
Fallacy  is  impossible. 

It  would  be  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  mere 
occurrence  of  negative  terms  in  both  premises  render 
them  incapable  of  yielding  a  conclusion.  The  old  rules 
of  logic  informed  us  that  from  two  negative  premises  no 
conclusion  could  be  drawn,  but  it  is  a  fact  that  the  rule 
in  this  bare  form  does  not  hold  universally  true  ;  and  I 
am  not  aware  that  any  precise  explanation  has  been 
given  of  the  conditions  under  which  it  is  or  is  not 
imperative.  Consider  the  following  example — 

Whatever  is  not  metallic  is  not  capable  of  power 
ful  magnetic  influence,  (i) 

Carbon  is  not  metallic,  (2) 

Therefore,  carbon  is  not  capable  of  powerful  mag 
netic  influence.  (3) 
Here  we  have  two  distinctly  negative  premises  (i)  and 
(2),  and  yet  they  yield  a  perfectly  valid  negative  con 
clusion  (3).      The  syllogistic  rule  is  actually  falsified  in 
its  bare  and  general  statement.     In  this  and  many  other 
cases  we   can   convert   the  propositions   into  affirmative 
ones  which  yield  a  conclusion.     To  show  this  let 
A  =  carbon,                          B  =  metallic, 
C  =  capable  of  powerful  magnetic  influence. 
The  premises  readily  take  the  form 

b    =  be  (i) 

A  =  A6,  (a) 

and  substitution  for  b  in  (2)  by  means  of  (i),  gives  the 
conclusion 

A  =  Abe  (3) 


DEDUCTIVE  REASONING.  77 

Our  principle  of  inference  then  includes  the  rule  of  nega 
tive  premises  whenever  it  is  true,  and  discriminates  correctly 
between  the  cases  where  it  does  and  does  not  apply. 

The  paralogism,  anciently  called  Undistributed  Middle, 
is  also  easily  exhibited  and  infallibly  avoided  by  our 
system.  Let  the  premises  be 

Hydrogen  is  an  element,  (i) 

All  metals  are  elements.  (2) 

According  to  the  syllogistic  rules  the  middle  term  element 
is  here  undistributed,  and  no  conclusion  can  be  obtained  ; 
we    cannot   tell    then  whether   hydrogen    is  or  is  not  a 
metal.     Eepresent  the  terms  as  follows — 
A  =  hydrogen 
B  =  element 
C  =  metal. 
The  premises  then  become 

A  =  AB  (i) 

C  =  CB.  (2) 

The  reader  will  here,  as  in  a  former  page  (p.  75),  find 
it  impossible  to  make  any  substitution.  The  only  term 
which  occurs  in  both  premises  is  B,  but  it  is  combined 
with  different  letters.  For  CB  we  cannot  substitute  the 
equivalent  of  AB.  We  have  no  right  to  decompose 
combinations  ;  and  if  we  adhere  rigidly  to  the  rule  given, 
that  if  two  terms  are  stated  to  be  equivalent  we  may 
substitute  one  for  the  other,  we  cannot  commit  the 
fallacy.  It  is  apparent  that  the  form  of  premises  given 
above  is  the  same  as  that  which  we  obtained  by  trans 
lating  two  negative  premises  into  the  affirmative  form. 

The  old  fallacy,  technically  called  the  Illicit  Process  of 
the  Major  Term,  is  more  easy  to  commit  and  more  diffi 
cult  to  detect  than  anv  other  breach  of  the  syllogistic  rules. 

*•  I/O 

In  our  system  it  could  hardly  occur.    From  the  premises 
All  planets  are  subject  to  gravity,  (i) 

Fixed  stars  are  not  planets,  (2) 


78  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

we  might  inadvertently  but  fallaciously  infer  that,  '  Fixed 
stars  are  not  subject  to  gravity.'  To  reduce  the  premises 
to  symbolic  form,  let 

A  =  planet 

B  =  fixed  star 

C  =  subject  to  gravity  ; 
then  we  have  the  propositions 

A  =  AC  (i) 

B  =  Ba.  (2) 

The  reader  will  try  in  vain  to  produce  from  these 
premises  by  legitimate  substitution  any  relation  between 
B  and  C  ;  he  could  not  then  commit  the  fallacy  of 
asserting  that  B  is  not  C. 

There  remain  two  other  kinds  of  paralogism,  com 
monly  known  as  the  fallacy  of  Four  Terms  and  the  Illicit 
Process  of  the  Minor  term.  They  are  so  evidently  impos 
sible  while  we  obey  the  rule  of  the  substitution  of  equi 
valents,  that  it  is  not  necessary  to  give  any  illustrations. 
When  there  are  four  distinct  terms  in  two  propositions 
there  could  be  no  opening  for  a  substitution.  As  to  the 
Illicit  Process  of  the  Minor  it  consists  in  a  flagrant  sub 
stitution  for  a  term  of  another  wider  term  which  is  not 
known  to  be  equivalent  to  it,  and  which  is  therefore 
forbidden  by  our  rule  to  be  substituted  for  it. 


CHAPTER  V. 

DISJUNCTIVE    PROPOSITIONS. 

IN  the  previous  chapter  I  have  exhibited  various  forms 
of  deductive  reasoning  by  the  process  of  substitution,  so 
far  as  they  can  be  treated  without  the  use  of  disjunctive 
propositions  ;  but  we  cannot  long  defer  the  consideration 
of  this  more  complex  class  of  identities.  General  terms 
arise,  as  we  have  seen  (p.  29),  from  classifying  or  men 
tally  uniting  together  all  objects  which  agree  in  certain 
qualities,  the  value  of  this  union  consisting  in  the  fact 
that  the  power  of  knowledge  is  multiplied  thereby.  In 
forming  such  classes  or  general  notions,  we  overlook  or 
abstract  the  points  of  difference  which  exist  between  the 
objects  joined  together,  and  fix  our  attention  only  on  the 
points  of  agreement.  But  every  process  of  thought  may 
be  said  to  have  its  inverse  process,  which  consists  in 
undoing  the  effects  of  the  direct  process.  Just  as  division 
undoes  multiplication,  and  evolution  undoes  involution, 
so  we  must  have  a  process  which  undoes  abstraction,  or 
the  operation  of  forming  general  notions.  This  inverse 
process  will  consist  in  distinguishing  the  separate  objects 
or  minor  classes  which  are  the  constituent  parts  of  any 
wider  class.  When  we  mentally  unite  together  certain 
objects  visible  in  the  sky  and  call  them  planets,  we  shall 
afterwards  need  to  distinguish  the  contents  of  this  general 
notion,  which  we  do  in  the  disjunctive  proposition  — 

A  planet  is  either  Mercury  or  Venus  or  the  Earth  or 

or  Neptune. 

Having  formed  the  very  wide  class  'vertebrate  animal/ 


80  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 


we  may  specify  its  subordinate  classes  thus  :— '  A  verte 
brate  animal  is  either  a  mammalian,  bird,  reptile,  or 
fish.'  Nor  is  there  any  limit  to  the  number  of  possible 
alternatives.  '  An  exogenous  plant  is  either  a  ranun 
culus,  a  poppy,  a  crucifer,  a  rose,  or  it  belongs  to  some 
one  of  the  other  seventy  natural  orders  of  exogens  at 
present  recognised  by  botanists/  A  cathedral  church  in 
England  must  be  either  that  of  London,  Canterbury, 
Winchester,  Salisbury,  Manchester,  or  of  one  of  about 
twenty-four  cities  possessing  such  churches.  And  if  we 
were  to  attempt  to  specify  the  meaning  of  the  term 
'star/  we  should  require  to  enumerate  as  alternatives, 
not  only  the  many  thousands  of  stars  recorded  in  cata 
logues,  but  the  many  millions  yet  unnamed. 

Whenever  we  thus  distinguish  the  parts  of  a  general 
notion  we  employ  a  disjunctive  proposition,  in  at  least 
one  side  of  which  are  several  alternatives  joined  by  the 
so  called  disjunctive  conjunction  or,  a  contracted  form  of 
other.  There  must  be  some  relation  between  the  parts 
thus  connected  in  one  proposition ;  we  may  call  it  the 
disjunctive  or  alternative  relation,  and  we  must  carefully 
inquire  into  its  nature  and  results.  This  relation  is  that 
of  doubt  and  ignorance,  giving  rise  to  choice  or  uncer 
tainty.  Whenever  we  classify  and  abstract  we  must  open 
the  way  to  such  uncertainty.  By  fixing  our  attention  on 
certain  attributes  to  the  exclusion  of  others  we  necessarily 
leave  it  doubtful  what  those  other  attributes  are.  The 
term  '  molar  tooth '  bears  upon  the  face  of  it  that  it  is  a 
part  of  the  wider  term  '  tooth/  But  if  we  meet  with  the 
simple  term  'tooth'  there  is  nothing  to  indicate  whether  it 
is  an  incisor,  a  canine,  or  a  molar  tooth.  This  doubt, 
however,  may  be  resolved  by  other  information,  and  we 
have  to  consider  what  are  the  appropriate  logical  pro 
cesses  for  treating  disjunctive  propositions  in  connection 
with  other  propositions  disjunctive  or  otherwise. 


DISJUNCTIVE  PROPOSITIONS.  81 

Expression  of  the  Alternative  Relation. 

In  order  to  represent  disjunctive  propositions  with 
convenience  we  require  a  sign  of  the  alternative  or  dis 
junctive  relation,  equivalent  to  one  meaning  at  least  of 
the  little  conjunction  or  so  frequently  used  in  common 
language.  I  propose  to  use  for  this  purpose  the  sym 
bol  |  .  In  my  first  logical  Essay  I  followed  the  example 
of  Dr.  Boole  and  adopted  the  common  sign  +  ;  but  this  sign 
should  not  be  employed  unless  there  exists  exact  analogy 
between  mathematical  addition  and  logical  alternation. 
We  shall  find  that  the  analogy  is  of  a  very  partial  cha 
racter,  and  that  there  is  such  profound  difference  between 
a  logical  and  a  mathematical  term  as  should  prevent  our 
uniting  them  by  the  same  symbol.  Accordingly  I  have 
chosen  a  sign  -|- ,  which  seems  aptly  to  suggest  whatever 
degree  of  analogy  may  exist  without  implying  more. 
The  exact  meaning  of  the  symbol  we  will  now  proceed  to 
investigate  and  determine. 

Nature  of  the  Alternative  Relation. 

Before  treating  disjunctive  propositions  it  is  indis 
pensable  to  decide  whether  the  alternatives  shall  be 
considered  exclusive  or  unexclusive.  By  exclusive  alter 
natives  we  mean  those  which  cannot  contain  the  same 
things.  Thus 

Matter  is  solid,  or  liquid,  or  gaseous  ; 

but  the  same  portion  of  matter  cannot  be  at  once  solid  and 
liquid,  properly  speaking  ;  still  less  can  we  suppose  it  to 
be  solid  and  gaseous,  or  solid,  liquid  and  gaseous  all  at 
the  same  time.  Many  examples  on  the  other  hand  can 
readily  be  suggested  in  which  two  or  more  alternatives 
may  hold  true  of  the  same  object.  Thus 

Luminous  bodies  are  self-luminous  or  luminous  by 
reflection. 

G 


82  Tin:  ritixciPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

It  is  undoubtedly  possible  by  the  laws  of  optics,  that  the 
same  surface  may  at  one  and  the  same  moment  give  off 
light  of  its  own  and  reflect  the  light  from  other  bodies. 
We  speak  familiarly  of  deaf  or  dumb  persons,  knowing 
that  the  majority  of  those  who  are  deaf  from  birth  are 
also  dumb. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  in  a  great  many  cases, 
perhaps  the  greater  number  of  cases,  alternatives  are 
exclusive  as  a  matter  of  fact.  Any  one  number  is  incom 
patible  with  any  other;  one  point  of  time  or  place  is 
exclusive  of  all  others.  Eoger  Bacon  died  either  in  1284 
or  1292  ;  it  is  certain  that  he  could  not  die  in  both  years. 
Henry  Fielding  was  born  either  in  Dublin  or  Somerset 
shire  ;  he  could  not  be  born  in  both  places.  There  is  so 
much  more  precision  and  clearness  in  the  use  of  exclusive 
alternatives  that  we  ought  doubtless  to  select  them 
when  possible.  Old  works  on  logic  accordingly  contained 
a  rule  directing  that  the  Membra  dividentia,  the  parts  of 
a  division  or  the  constituent  species  of  a  genus  should  be 
exclusive  of  each  other. 

It  is  no  doubt  owing  to  the  great  prevalence  and 
convenience  of  exclusive  divisions  that  the  majority  of 
logicians  have  held  it  necessary  to  make  every  alternative 
in  a  disjunctive  proposition  exclusive  of  every  other  one. 
Aquinas  considered  that  when  this  was  not  the  case  the 
proposition  was  actuallyyafoe,  and  Kant  adopted  the  same 
opinion a.  A  multitude  of  statements  to  the  same  effect 
might  readily  be  quoted,  and  if  the  question  were  to  be 
determined  by  the  weight  of  historical  evidence,  it  would 
.certainly  go  against  my  view.  Among  recent  logicians 
Sir  W.  Hamilton,  as  well  as  Dr.  Boole,  took  the  exclusive 
side.  But  there  are  authorities  to  the  opposite  effect. 
Whately,  Mansel,  and  J.  S.  Mill,  have  all  pointed  out  that 

a  Hansel's  '  Aldrich,'  p.  103,  and  'Prolegomena  Loglea,'  p.  221. 


DISJUNCTIVE   PROPOSITIONS.  83 

we  may  often  treat  alternatives  as  Compossible,  or  true  at 
the  same  time.  Whately  gives  as  an  example b,  'Virtue 
tends  to  procure  us  either  the  esteem  of  mankind,  or  the 
favour  of  God/  and  he  adds,  '  Here  both  members  are 
true,  and  consequently  from  one  being  affirmed  we  are  not 
authorized  to  deny  the  other.  Of  course  we  are  left  to 
conjecture  in  each  case,  from  the  context,  whether  it  is 
meant  to  be  implied  that  the  members  are  or  are  not 
exclusive.'  Mansel  says  c,  '  We  may  happen  to  know  that 
two  alternatives  cannot  be  true  together,  so  that  the 
affirmation  of  the  second  necessitates  the  denial  of  the  first ; 
but  this,  as  Boethius  observes,  is  a  material,  not  &  formal 
consequence/  Mr.  J.  S.  Mill  has  also  pointed  out  the 
absurdities  which  would  arise  from  always  interpreting 
alternatives  as  exclusive.  '  If  we  assert/  he  says  d ,  '  that 
a  man  who  has  acted  in  some  particular  way  must  be 
either  a  knave  or  a  fool,  we  by  no  means  assert,  or  intend 
to  assert,  that  he  cannot  be  both.'  Again,  'to  make  an 
entirely  unselfish  use  of  despotic  power,  a  man  must  be 
either  a  saint  or  a  philosopher Does  the  dis 
junctive  premise  necessarily  imply,  or  must  it  be  construed 
as  supposing,  that  the  same  person  cannot  be  both  a 
saint  and  a  philosopher  ?  Such  a  construction  would  be 
ridiculous.' 

I  discuss  this  subject  fully  because  it  is  really  the  point 
which  separates  my  logical  system  from  that  of  the  late 
Dr.  Boole.  In  his  'Laws  of  Thought'  (p.  32)  he  expressly 
says,  'In  strictness,  the  words  "and/'  "or,"  interposed 
between  the  terms  descriptive  of  two  or  more  classes  of 
objects,  imply  that  those  classes  are  quite  distinct,  so  that 
no  member  of  one  is  found  in  another/  This  I  altogether 

b  '  Elements  of  Logic,'  Book  II.  chap.  iv.  sect.  4. 
c  Aldrich,  'Artis  Logicse  Rudimenta,'  p.  104. 
a  'Examination  of  Sir  W.  Hamilton's  Philosophy,'  pp.  452-454- 

G    2 


84  TEE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

dispute.  In  the  ordinary  use  of  these  conjunctions  we  do 
not  necessarily  join  distinct  terms  only  ;  and  when  terms 
so  joined  do  prove  to  be  logically  distinct,  it  is  by  virtue 
of  a  tacit  premise,  something  in  the  meaning  of  the  names 
and  our  knowledge  of  them,  which  teaches  us  they  are 
distinct.  And  when  our  knowledge  of  the  meanings  of  the 
words  joined  is  defective  it  will  often  be  impossible  to 
decide  whether  terms  joined  by  conjunctions  are  exclusive 
or  not. 

Take,  for  instance,  the  proposition  'A  peer  is  either 
a  duke,  or  a  marquis,  or  an  earl,  or  a  viscount,  or  a  baron/ 
If  expressed  in  Professor  Boole's  symbols,  it  would  be 
implied  that  a  "peer  cannot  be  at  once  a  duke  and  marquis, 
or  marquis  and  earl.  Yet  many  peers  do  possess  two  or 
more  titles,  and  the  Prince  of  Wales  is  Duke  of  Cornwall, 
Earl  of  Dublin,  and  Baron  Renfrew.  If  it  were  enacted  by 
parliament  that  no  peer  should  have  more  than  one  title, 
this  would  be  the  tacit  premise  which  Professor  Boole 
assumes  to  exist.  Nor  is  the  restriction  true  of  more 
common  terms. 

In  the  sentence  'Repentance  is  not  a  single  act,  but  a 
habit  or  virtue/  it  cannot  be  implied  that  a  virtue  is  not  a 
habit ;  by  Aristotle's  definition  it  is. 

Milton  has  the  expression  in  one  of  his  sonnets, 
1  Unstain'd  by  gold  or  fee/  where  it  is  obvious  that  if 
the  fee  is  not  always  gold,  the  gold  is  meant  to  be  a  fee 
or  bribe. 

Tennyson  has  the  expression  'wreath  or  anadem/  Most 
readers  would  be  quite  uncertain  whether  a  wreath  may 
be  an  anadem,  or  an  anadem  a  wreath,  or  whether  they 
are  quite  distinct  or  quite  the  same. 

From  Darwin's  *  Origin/  I  take  the  expression,  '  When 
we  see  any  part  or  organ  developed  in  a  remarkable 
degree  or  manner.'  In  this,  or  is  used  twice,  and  neither 
time  disjunctively.  For  if  part  and  organ  are  not 


DISJUNCTIVE   PROPOSITIONS.  85 

synonymous,  at  any  rate  an  organ  is  a  part.  And  it  is 
obvious  that  a  part  may  be  developed  at  the  same  time 
both  in  an  extraordinary  degree  and  manner,  although 
such  cases  may  be  comparatively  very  rare. 

From  a  careful  examination  of  ordinary  writings,  it 
will  thus  be  found  that  the  meanings  of  terms  joined  by 
'  and '  *  or '  vary  from  absolute  identity  up  to  absolute 
contrariety.  There  is  no  logical  condition  of  distinctness 
at  all,  and  when  we  do  choose  exclusive  expressions,  it  is 
because  our  subject  demands  it.  The  matter,  not  the  form 
of  an  expression,  points  out  whether  terms  are  exclusive e. 

The  question,  as  we  shall  afterwards  see,  is  one  of  the 
greatest  theoretical  importance,  because  it  furnishes  the 
true  distinction  between  the  sciences  of  Logic  and  Ma 
thematics.  It  is  the  very  foundation  of  number  that  every 
unit  shall  be  distinct  from  every  other  unit ;  but  Dr.  Boole 
imported  the  conditions  of  number  into  the  science  of 
Logic,  and  produced  a  system  which,  though  wonderful  in 
its  results,  was  not  a  system  of  logic  at  all. 

Laws  of  the  Disjunctive  Relation. 

In  considering  the  combination  or  synthesis  of  terms 
(p-  39)' we  fcavnd  that  certain  laws,  those  of  Simplicity  and 
Commutativeness,  must  be  observed.  In  uniting  terms  by 
the  disjunctive  symbol  we  shall  find  that  the  same  or 
closely  similar  laws  hold  true.  The  alternatives  of  either 
member  of  a  disjunctive  proposition  are  certainly  commu 
tative.  Just  as  we  cannot  properly  distinguish  between 
rich  and  rare  gems  and  rare  and  rich  gems,  so  we  must 
consider  as  identical  the  expression  rich  or  rare  gems,  and 
rare  or  rich  gems.  In  our  symbolic  language  we  may  say 

generally 

A  !  B  =  B  |  A. 

e  '  Pure  Logic,.'  pp.  76,  77. 


86 


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 


The  order  of  statement,  in  short,  has  no  effect  upon  the 
meaning  of  an  aggregate  of  alternatives,  so  that  the  Law 
of  Commutativeness  holds  true  of  the  disjunctive  symbol. 

As  we  have  admitted  the  possibility  of  joining  as  alter 
natives  terms  which  are  not  really  different,  the  ques 
tion  arises,  How  shall  Ave  treat  two  or  more  alternatives 
when  they  are  clearly  shown  to  be  the  samel  If  we 
have  it  asserted  that  P  is  Q  or  R,  and  it  is  afterwards 
proved  that  Q  is  but  another  name  for  R,  the  result  is 
that  P  is  either  R  or  R.  How  shall  we  interpret  such  a 
statement  \  What  would  be  the  meaning,  for  instance,  of 
'  wreath  or  anadem '  if,  on  referring  to  a  dictionary,  we 
found  anadem  described  as  a  wreath  ?  I  take  it  to  be 
self-evident  that  the  meaning  would  then  become  simply 
'  wreath.'  Accordingly  we  may  affirm  the  general  law 

A  .|.  A  ~  A. 

Any  number  of  identical  alternatives  may  always  be 
reduced  to,  and  are  logically  equivalent  to,  any  one  of 
those  alternatives.  This  is  a  law  which  distinguishes 
mathematical  terms  from  logical  terms,  because  it  ob 
viously  does  not  apply  to  the  former.  I  propose  to  call 
it  the  Law  of  Unity,  because  it  must  really  be  involved 
in  any  definition  of  a  mathematical  unit.  This  law  is 
closely  analogous  to  the  Law  of  Simplicity,  A  A  =  A  ;  and 
the  nature  of  the  connection  is  worthy  of  attention. 

I  am  not  aware  that  logicians  have  in  any  adequate  way 
noticed  the  close  relation  between  combined  and  dis 
junctive  terms,  namely  that  every  disjunctive  term  is  the 
negative  of  a  corresponding  combined  term,  and  vice  versd. 
Consider  the  term 

Malleable  dense  metal. 

How  shall  we  describe  the  class  of  things  which  are  not 

o 

malleable-dense-metals  ?  Whatever  is  included  under  that 
term  must  have  all  the  qualities  of  malleability,  denseness, 
and  metallic  nature.  Wherever  any  one  or  more  of  the 


DISJUNCTIVE  PROPOSITIONS,  87 

qualities  is  wanting,  the  combined  term  will  not  apply. 
Hence  the  negative  of  the  whole  term  is 

Not-malleable  or  not-dense  or  not-metallic. 
In  the  above  the  conjunction  or  must  clearly  be  inter 
preted  as  unexckuave  ;  for  there  may  readily  be  objects 
which  are  both  not-malleable,  and  not-dense,  and  perhaps 
not-metallic  at  the  same  time.  If  in  fact  we  were  required 
to  use  or  in  a  strictly  exclusive  manner,  it  would  be 
requisite  to  specify  seven  distinct  alternatives  in  order  to 
describe  the  negative  of  a  combination  of  three  single 
terms.  The  negatives  of  four  or  five  terms  would  consist 

o 

of  fifteen  or  thirty-one  alternatives.  This  consideration 
alone  is  sufficient  to  prove  that  the  meaning  of  or  can 
not 'be  always  exclusive  in  common  language. 

Expressed  symbolically,  we  may  say  that  the  negative 

of 

ABC 

is  not- A  or  not-B  or  not-C  ; 

that  is,  a  {  b  •{•  c. 

Eeciprocally  the  negative  of 

P  I  Q  I   R 

is  pqr. 

Every   disjunctive   term,    then,    is   the   negative  of  a 
combined  term,  and  vice  versa. 

Apply  this  result  to  the  combined  term  A  A  A,  and  its 
negative  is 

a  •[   a  •[   a. 

Now  since  AAA  is  by  the  Law  of  Simplicity  equivalent  to 
A,  so  a  |  a  -|-  a  must  be  by  the  Law  of  Unity  equivalent 
to  a.  Each  law  thus  necessarily  presupposes  the  other. 

Symbolic  expression  of  the  Law  of  Duality. 

We  may  now  employ  our  symbol  of  alternation  to  express 
in  a  clear  and  formal  manner  the  third  Fundamental  Law 


88  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

of  Thought,  which  I  have  called  the  Law  of  Duality. 
Taking  A  to  represent  any  class  or  object  or  quality,  and 
B  any  other  class,  object  or  quality,  we  may  always 
assert  that  A  either  agrees  with  B,  or  does  not  agree. 

Thus  we  may  say 

A  -  AB  -I-  A6. 

This  is  a  formula  which  will  henceforth  be  constantly 
employed,  and  it  lies  at  the  basis  of  reasoning. 

The  reader  may  perhaps  wish  to  know  why  A  is  inserted 
in  both  alternatives  of  the  second  member  of  the  identity, 
and  why  the  law  is  not  stated  in  the  form 

A=B  +  2>. 

But  if  he  will  consider  the  contents  of  the  last  section 
(p.  87),  he  will  see  that  the  latter  expression  cannot  be 
correct,  otherwise  no  term  would  have  any  negative. 
For  the  negative  of  B  -|-  b  is  &B,  or  a  self-contradictory 
term  ;  so  that  if  A  were  identical  with  B  -|-  b,  its  nega 
tive  a  would  be  non-existent.  This  result  would  generally 
be  an  absurd  one,  and  I  see  much  reason  to  think  that  in 
a  strictly  logical  point  of  view  it  would  always  be  absurd. 
In  all  probability  we  ought  to  assume  as  a  fundamental 
logical  axiom  that  every  term  has  its  negative  in  thought. 
We  cannot  think  at  all  without  separating  what  we  think 
about  from  other  different  things,  and  these  things  neces 
sarily  form  the  negative  notion f.  If  so,  it  follows  that 
any  term  of  the  form  B  f  b  is  just  as  self-contradictory 
as  one  of  the  form  B6. 

It  will  be  convenient  to  recapitulate  in  this  place  the 
three  great  Laws  of  Thought  in  their  symbolic  form,  thus 

Law  of  Identity  A  =  A. 

Law  of  Contradiction         Aa  =  o. 

Law  of  Duality  A  =  AB  |  A.b. 

'Pure  Logic,'   p.    65.     See   also   the   criticism  of  this  point  by  De 
Morgan  in  the  '  Athenseum,'  No.  1892,  soth  January,  1864  ;  p.  155. 


DISJUNCTIVE  PROPOSITIONS.  89 

Various  Forms  of  the  Disjunctive  Proposition. 

Disjunctive  propositions  may  occur  in  a  great  variety  of 
forms,  of  which   the  old  logicians   took  very  insufficient 

O  I/ 

notice.  There  may  be  any  number  of  alternatives  each  of 
which  may  be  a  combination  of  any  number  of  simple 
terms.  A  proposition,  again,  may  be  disjunctive  in  one 
or  both  members.  The  proposition 

Solids  or  liquids  or  gases  are  electrics  or  conductors  of 

electricity 

is  an  example  of  the  doubly  disjunctive  form.  The  mean 
ing  of  any  such  proposition  is  that  whatever  falls  under 
any  one  or  more  alternatives  on  one  side  must  fall  under 
one  or  more  alternatives  on  the  other  side.  From  what 
has  been  said  before,  it  is  apparent  that  the  proposition 

A | B  =  C | D 
will  correspond  to 

ab  =  cd, 

each  member  of  the  latter  being  the  negative  of  a 
member  of  the  former  proposition. 

As  an  instance   of  a  complex  disjunctive   proposition 
I  may  give  Senior's  definition  of  wealth,  namely  '  Wealth 
is    what   is   transferable,   limited   in    supply,  and   either 
productive  of  pleasure  or  preventive  of  pain  &'.' 
Let  A  =  wealth 

B  =  transferable 
C  =  limited  in  supply 
D  =  productive  of  pleasure 
E  =  preventive  of  pain. 
The  definition  takes  the  form 

A  =  BC(D*  E); 

but  if  we  develop  the    alternatives   by  a  method  to  be 
afterwards  more  fully  considered,  it  becomes 
A  =  BCDE  |  BCDe  I- BCdE. 

s  Boole's  'Laws  of  Thought,'  p.  106.     Jevoiis'  'Pure  Logic,'  p.  69. 


90  THE  PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

An  example  of  a  still  more  complex  proposition  may 
be  found  in  De  Morgan's  writings11,  and  is  as  follows  :— 
'  He  must  have  been  rich,  and  if  not  absolutely  mad  was 
weakness  itself,  subjected  either  to  bad  advice  or  to  most 
unfavourable  circumstances/ 

If  we  assign  the  letters  of  the  alphabet  in  succession, 

thus, 

A  -  he 

B  =  rich 

C  =  absolutely  mad 

D  =  weakness  itself 

E  =  subjected  to  bad  advice 

F  =  subjected  to  most  unfavourable  circumstances, 
the  proposition  will  take  the  form 


and  if  we  develop  the  alternatives,  expressing  some  of 
the  different  cases  which  may  happen,  we  obtain 
A-  ABC  |  ABcDEF  |-  ABcDE/  |-  ABcDeF. 

Inference  by  Disjunctive  Propositions. 

Before  we  can  make  a  free  use  of  disjunctive  propositions 
in  the  processes  of  inference  \ve  must  consider  how  dis 
junctive  terms  can  be  combined  together  or  with  simple 
terms.  In  the  first  place,  to  combine  a  simple  term  with 
a  disjunctive  one,  we  must  combine  it  with  every  alter 
native  of  the  disjunctive  term.  A  vegetable,  for  instance, 
is  either  a  herb,  a  shrub,  or  a  tree.  Hence  an  exogenous 
vegetable  is  either  an  exogenous  herb,  or  an  exogenous 
shrub,  or  an  exogenous  tree.  Symbolically  stated  this 
process  of  combination  is  as  follows  — 

A(B-|  C)  =  AB-|  AC. 

Secondly,  to  combine  two  disjunctive  terms  with  each 
other,  combine  each  alternative  of  one  separately  with  each 

h  'On  the  Syllogism,'  No.  iii.  p.  12.  Camb.  Phil.  Trans.,  vol.  x. 
part  i. 


DISJUNCTIVE  PROPOSITIONS.  91 

alternative  of  the  other.  Since  flowering  plants  are 
either  exogens  or  endogens,  and  are  at  the  same  time  either 
herbs,  shrubs  or  trees,  it  follows  that  there  are  altogether 
six  alternatives — namely,  exogenous  herbs,  exogenous 
shrubs,  exogenous  trees,  endogenous  herbs,  endogenous 
shrubs,  endogenous  trees.  This  process  of  combination  is 
shown  in  the  general  form 

(A  I  B)  (C  -|-  D)  -  AC  |  AD  +  BC  \  BD. 
It  is  hardly  necessary  to  point  out  that,  however  numerous 
the  terms  combined,  or  the  alternatives  in  those  terms,  we 
may  effect  the  combination  provided  each  alternative  is 
combined  with  each  alternative  of  the  other  terms,  as  in 
the  algebraic  process  of  multiplication. 

Some  processes  of  deduction  may  at  once  be  exhibited. 
We  may  always,  for  instance,  unite  the  same  qualifying 
term  to  each  side  of  an  identity  even  though  one  or  both 
members  of  the  identity  be  disjunctive.  Thus  let 

A  =  B  | -  C. 
Now  it  is  self-evident  that 

AD -AD, 

and  in  one  side  of  this  identity  we  may  for  A  substitute 
its  equivalent  B  -|-  C  obtaining 

AD  =  BD  |  CD. 

Since  '  a  gaseous  element  is  either  hydrogen,  or  oxygen, 
or  nitrogen,  or  chlorine,  or  fluorine/  it  follows  that  '  a  free 
gaseous  element  is  either  free  hydrogen,  or  free  oxygen, 
or  free  nitrogen,  or  free  chlorine,  or  free  fluorine.' 

This  process  of  combination  will  lead  to  most  useful 
inferences  when  the  qualifying  adjective  combined  with 
both  sides  of  the  proposition  is  a  negative  of  one  or  more 
alternatives.  Since  chlorine  is  a  coloured  gas,  we  may 
infer  that  '  a  colourless  gaseous  element  is  either  (colour 
less)  hydrogen,  oxygen,  nitrogen,  or  fluorine.'  The  alter 
native  chlorine  disappears  because  colourless  chlorine  does 
not  exist.  Again,  since  'a  tooth  is  either  an  incisor, 


92  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

canine,  bicuspid,  or  molar,'  it  follows  that  'a  not-incisor 
tooth  is  either  canine,  bicuspid,  or  molar.'  The  general 
rule  is  that  from  the  denial  of  any  of  the  alternatives  the 
affirmation  of  the  remainder  can  be  inferred.  Now  this 
result  clearly  follows  from  our  process  of  substitution  ;  for 
if  we  have  the  proposition 

A  =  B  |C|D, 

and  insert  this  expression  for  A  on  one  side  of  the  self- 
evident  identitv 

A6  =  A6, 

we  obtain  A.b  =  AB6  -I-  A6C  I  AbD  ;. 

and,  as  the  first  of  the  three  alternatives  is  self-contra 
dictory,  we  strike  it  out  according  to  the  law  of  contra 
diction  :  there  remains 

Ab  =  AbC  -I-  A6D. 

Thus  our  system  fully  includes  and  explains  that  mood  of 
the  Disjunctive  Syllogism  technically  called  the  modus 
tollendo  ponens. 

But  the  reader  must  carefully  observe  that  the  Dis 
junctive  Syllogism  of  the  mood  ponendo  tollens,  which  af 
firms  one  alternative,  and  thence  infers  the  denial  of  the  rest, 
cannot  be  held  true  in  this  system.  If  I  say,  indeed,  that 

Water  is  either  salt  or  fresh  water, 

it  seems  evident  that  '  water  which  is  salt  is  not  fresh/ 
But  this  inference  really  proceeds  from  our  knowledge 
that  water  cannot  be  at  once  salt  and  fresh.  This  incon 
sistency  of  the  alternatives,  as  I  have  fully  shown,  will 
not  always  hold.  Thus,  if  I  say 

Gems  are  either  rare  stones  or  beautiful  stones,       (i) 
it  will  obviously  not  follow  that 

A  rare  gem  is  not  a  beautiful  stone,  (2) 

nor  that 

A  beautiful  gem  is  not  a  rare  stone.  (3) 

Our  symbolic  method  gives  only  true  conclusions ;  for  if 
we  take 


DISJUNCTIVE   PROPOSITIONS.  93 

A  =  gem 
B  =  rare  stone 
C  =  beautiful  stone, 
the  proposition  ( i )  is  of  the  form 

A  -  B  |  C 

hence  AB  =  B  -|-  BC 

and  AC  -  BC  I  C  ; 

but  these  inferences  are  not  equivalent  to  the  false  ones 
(2)  and  (3). 

We  can  readily  represent  such  disjunctive  reasoning,  when 
it  is  valid,  by  expressing  the  inconsistency  of  the  alterna 
tives  explicitly.  Thus  if  we  resort  to  our  instance  of 

Water  is  either  salt  or  fresh, 
and  take  A  =  Water 

B  .-=  salt 
C  =  fresh, 
then  the  premise  is  apparently  of  the  form 

A  =  AB  I  AC ; 

but  in  reality  there  are  the  unexpressed  conditions  that 
'  what  is  salt  is  not  fresh/  and  '  what  is  fresh  is  not  salt ; ' 

or,  in  letter-terms, 

B  =  Be 

C  =  60. 

Now,  if  we  substitute  these  descriptions  in  the  original 
proposition,  we  obtain 

A  =  ABc  |A6C; 
uniting  B  to  each  side  we  infer 

AB  =  ABc  |  AB6C 
or  AB  =  ABc ; 

that  is, 

Water  which  is  salt  is  water  salt  and  not  fresh. 

I  should  weary  the  reader  if  I  attempted  to  illustrate 
the  multitude  of  forms  which  disjunctive  reasoning  may 
take  ;  and  as  in  the  next  chapter  we  shall  be  constantly 
treating  the  subject,  I  must  here  restrict  myself  to  a  single 


94  THE    PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

instance.  A  very  common  process  of  reasoning  consists  in 
the  determination  of  the  name  of  a  thing  by  the  successive 
exclusion  of  alternatives,  a  process  called  by  the  old  name 
abscissio  infiniti.  Take  the  case : — 

Red-coloured  metal  is  either  copper  or  gold      ( i ) 
Copper  is  dissolved  by  nitric  acid  (2) 

This  specimen  is  red-coloured  metal  (3) 

This  specimen  is  not  dissolved  by  nitric  acid     (4) 
Therefore  this  specimen  consists  of  gold.  (5) 

Assigning  our  letter-symbols  thus  — 
A  =  this  specimen 
B  =  red-coloured  metal 
C  =  copper 
D  =  gold 

E  =  dissolved  by  nitric  acid, 
the  premises  may  be  stated  in  the  form 

B  =  BCcM-BcD  (i) 

C  =  CE  (2) 

A  =  AB  (3) 

A  =  Ae.  (4) 

Substituting  for  C  in  (i)  by  means  of  (2)  we  get 

B  =  BCdE  !  BcD. 
From  (3)  and  (4)  we  may  infer  likewise 

A  =  ABe, 

and  if  in  this  we  substitute  for  B  its  equivalent  just 
stated,  it  follows  that 

A  =  ABCcZEe  -I  ABcDe. 

The  first  of  the  alternatives  being  contradictory,  the  result 
is  A  =  ABcDe 

which  contains  a  full  description  of  '  this  specimen/  as 
furnished  in  the  premises,  but  by  ellipsis  indicates  that 
it  is  gold.  It  will  be  observed  that  in  the  symbolic 
expression  (i)  I  have  explicitly  stated  what  is  certainly 
implied,  that  copper  is  not  gold,  and  gold  not  copper, 
without  which  condition  the  inference  would  not  hold  good. 


CHAPTEK   VI. 

THE   INDIRECT   METHOD    OF   INFERENCE. 

THE  forms  of  deductive  reasoning  as  yet  considered,  are 
mostly  cases  of  Direct  Deduction  as  distinguished  from 
those  which  we  are  now  about  to  treat.  The  method  of 
Indirect  Deduction  may  be  described  as  that  which  points 
out  what  a  thing  is,  by  showing  that  it  cannot  be  anything 
else.  We  can  define  a  certain  space  upon  a  map,  either  by 
colouring  that  space,  or  by  colouring  all  except  the  space  ; 
the  first  mode  is  positive,  the  second  negative.  The  dif 
ference,  it  will  be  readily  seen,  is  exactly  analogous  to  that 
between  the  direct  and  indirect  proof  in  geometry.  Euclid 
often  shows  that  two  lines  are  equal,  by  showing  that  they 
cannot  be  unequal,  and  the  proof  rests  upon  the  known  num 
ber  of  alternatives,  greater,  equal  or  less,  which  are  alone 
conceivable.  In  other  cases,  as  for  instance  in  the  seventh 
proposition  of  the  first  book,  he  shows  that  two  lines  must 
meet  in  a  particular  point,  by  showing  that  they  cannot 
meet  elsewhere. 

In  logic  we  can  always  define  with  certainty  the  utmost 
number  of  alternatives  which  are  conceivable.  The  Law 
of  Duality  (pp.  6,  88)  enables  us  always  to  assert  that  any 
quality  or  circumstance  whatsoever  is  either  present  or 
absent  in  anything.  Whatever  may  be  the  meaning  and 
nature  of  the  terms  A  and  B  it  is  certainly  true  that 

A  =  AB  -i-  Kb 
B  =  AB  I  aB. 

These  are  universal  though  tacit  premises  which  may 
be  employed  in  the  solution  of  every  problem,  and  which 


96  THE  PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

are  such  invariable-  and  necessary  conditions  of  all  thought, 
that  they  need  not  be  specially  laid  down.  The  Law  of 
Contradiction  is  a  further  condition  of  all  thought  and  of 
all  logical  symbols ;  it  enables,  and  in  fact  obliges,  us  to 
reject  from  further  consideration  all  terms  which  imply 
the  presence  and  absence  of  the  same  quality.  Now, 
whenever  we  bring  both  these  Laws  of  Thought  into  ex 
plicit  action  by  the  method  of  substitution,  we  employ  the 
Indirect  Method  of  Inference.  It  will  be  found  that  we 
can  treat  not  only  those  arguments  already  exhibited 
according  to  the  direct  method,  but  we  can  also  include  an 
infinite  multitude  of  other  arguments  which  are  incapable 
of  solution  by  any  other  means. 

Some  philosophers,  especially  those  of  France,  have 
held  that  the  Indirect  Method  of  Proof  has  a  certain  infe 
riority  to  a  direct  method,  which  should  prevent  our  using 
it  except  when  obliged.  But  there  are  an  unlimited 
number  of  truths  which  we  can  prove  only  indirectly. 
We  can  prove  that  a  number  is  a  prime  only  by  the 
purely  indirect  method  of  showing  that  it  is  not  any  of  the 
numbers  which  have  divisors,  and  the  remarkable  process 
known  as  Eratosthenes'  Sieve  is  the  only  mode  by  which 
we  can  select  the  prime  numbers a.  It  bears  a  strong 
analogy  to  the  indirect  method  here  to  be  described.  We 
can  also  prove  that  the  side  and  diameter  of  a  square  are 
incommensurable,  but  only  in  the  negative  or  indirect 
manner,  by  showing  that  the  contrary  supposition  con 
stantly  and  inevitably  leads  to  contradiction b.  Many  other 
demonstrations  in  various  branches  of  the  mathematical 
sciences  rest  upon  a  like  method.  Now  if  there  is  only 
one  important  truth  which  must  be,  and  can  only  be 

"See  Horsley,  '  Philosophical  Transactions,'  1772;  vol.  Ixii.  p.  327. 
Hontucla,  '  Histoire  des  Mathematiques,'  vol.  i.  p.  239.  '  Penny 
Cyclopaedia, '  article  Eratosthenes. 

b  Euclid,  Book  x.  Prop.  117. 


THE  INDIRECT  METHOD  OF  INFERENCE.  97 

proved  indirectly,  we  may  say  that  the  process  is  a 
necessary  and  sufficient  one,  and  the  question  of  its  com 
parative  excellence  or  usefulness  is  not  worth  discussion. 
As  a  matter  of  fact  I  believe  that  nearly  half  our  logical 
conclusions  rest  upon  its  employment. 

Simple  Illustrations. 

In  tracing  out  the  powers  and  results  of  this  method,  we 
will  begin  with  the  simplest  possible  instance.  Let  us  take 
a  proposition  of  the  very  common  form,  A  =  AB,  say, 

A  Metal  is  an  Element, 

and  let  us  investigate  its  full  meaning.  Any  person  who 
has  had  the  least  logical  training,  is  aware  that  we  can 
draw  from  the  above  proposition  an  apparently  different 
one,  namely, 

A  Not-element  is  a  Not-metal. 

While  some  logicians,  as  for  instance  De  Morgan,6  have 
considered  the  relation  of  these  two  propositions  to  be 
purely  self-evident,  and  neither  needing  nor  allowing 
analysis,  a  great  many  more  persons,  as  I  have  observed 
while  teaching  logic,  are  at  first  unable  to  perceive  the 
close  connection  between  them.  I  believe  that  a  true  and 
complete  system  of  logic  will  furnish  a  clear  analysis  of 
this  process  which  has  been  called  Contrapositive  Con 
version  ;  the  full  process  is  as  follows  : — 

Firstly,  by  the  Law  of  Duality  we  know  that 

Not-element  is  either  Metal  or  Not-metal. 
Now  if  it  be  metal,  we  know  that  it  is  by  the  premise 
an  element ;  we  should  thus  be  supposing  that  the  very 
same  thing  is  an  element  and  a  not-element,  which  is 
in  opposition  to  the  Law  of  Contradiction.  According  to 
the  only  other  alternative,  then,  the  not-element  must  be 
a  not-metal. 

c  'Philosophical  Magazine,'  December   1852,  Fourth  Series,   vol.    iv. 
p.  435,  'On  Indirect  Demonstration,' 

H 


98  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

To  represent  this  process  of  inference  symbolically  we 
take  the  premise  in  the  form 

A  -  AB.  (i) 

We  observe  that  by  the  Law  of  Duality  the  term  not-B  is 

thus  described 

I  =  A6  -I-  ab.  (2) 

For  A  in  this  proposition  we  substitute  its  description 
as  given  in  (i),  obtaining 

1}  -  AB6  -I-  ab. 

But  according  to  the  Law  of  Contradiction  the  term 
AB6  must  be  excluded  from  thought  or 

AB6  =  o. 

Hence  it  results  that  6  is  either  nothing  at  all,  or  it  is 
ab ;  and  the  conclusion  is 

b  =  ab. 

As  it  will  often  be  necessary  to  refer  to  a  conclusion 
of  this  kind  I  shall  call  it,  as  is  usual,  the  Contrapositive 
Proposition  of  the  original.  The  reader  need  hardly  be 
cautioned  to  observe  that  from  all  A's  are  B's  it  does  not 
follow  that  all  not-A's  are  not-B's.  For  by  the  Law 
of  Duality  we  have 

a  =  aB  |  ab, 

and  it  will  not  be  found  possible  to  make  any  substitu 
tion  in  this  by  our  original  premise  A  =  AB.  It  still 
remains  doubtful,  therefore,  whether  not-metal  is  element 
or  not-element. 

The  proof  of  the  Contrapositive  Proposition  given  above 
is  exactly  the  same  as  that  which  Euclid  applies  in  the 
case  of  geometrical  notions.  De  Morgan  describes  Euclid's 
process  as  follows  d  : — '  From  every  not-B  is  not-A  he  pro 
duces  every  A  is  B,  thus — If  it  be  possible,  let  this  A  be 
not-B,  but  every  not-B  is  not-A,  therefore  this  A  is  not-A, 
which  is  absurd :  whence  every  A  is  B.'  Now  De  Morgan 
thinks  that  this  proof  is  entirely  needless,  because  common 

d  'Philosophical  Magazine,'  Dec.  1852  ;   p.  437. 


THE  INDIRECT  METHOD  OF  INFERENCE.  99 

logic  gives  the  inference  without  the  use  of  any  geo 
metrical  reasoning.  I  conceive  however  that  logic  gives 
the  inference  only  by  an  indirect  process.  De  Morgan 
claims  'to  see  identity  in  every  A  is  B  and  every  not-B 
is  not-A,  by  a  process  of  thought  prior  to  syllogism/ 
But  whether  prior  to  syllogism  or  not,  I  claim  that  it 
is  not  prior  to  the  laws  of  thought  and  the  process  of 
substitutive  inference  by  which  it  may  be  undoubtedly 
demonstrated. 

Employment  of  the  Contrapositive  Proposition. 

We  can  frequently  employ  the  contrapositive  form  of 
a  proposition  by  the  method  of  substitution  ;  and  certain 
moods  of  the  ancient  syllogism,  which  we  have  hitherto 
passed  over,  may  thus  be  satisfactorily  comprehended 
in  our  system.  Take  for  instance  the  following  syllogism 
in  the  mood  Camestres  :— 

'  Whales  are  not  true  fish  :  for  they  do  not  respire 
water,  whereas  true  fish  do  respire  water.' 

Let  us  take 

A  =  whales, 
B  =  true  fish, 
C  =  respiring  water. 
The  premises  are  of  the  form 

A  =  Ac,  (i) 

B  =  BC.  (2) 

Now,  by  the  process  of  contraposition  we  obtain  from  (2) 

c  =  be, 

and  we  can  substitute  this  expression  for  c  in  (i),  ob 
taining 

A  =  A&c, 

or  '  Whales  are  not  true  fish,  not  respiring  water/ 

The  mood  Cesare  does  not  really  differ  from  Camestres 
except  in  the  order  of  the  premises,  and  it  could  be 
exhibited  in  an  exactly  similar  manner. 

H  2 


100  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

The  mood  Baroko  gave  much  trouble  to  the  old  lo 
gicians  who  could  not  reduce  it  to  the  first  figure  in 
the  same  manner  as  the  other  moods,  and  were  obliged 
to  invent,  specially  for  it  and  for  Bokardo,  a  method  of 
Indirect  Eeduction  closely  analogous  to  the  Indirect  proof 
of  Euclid.  Now  these  moods  require  no  exceptional 
processes,  in  this  system.  Let  us  take  as  an  instance  of 
Baroko,  the  argument 

All  heated  solids  give  continuous  spectra,  (i) 

Some  nebulaB  do  not  give  continuous  spectra ;      (2) 
Therefore  some  nebulae  are  not  heated  solids.       (3) 
Treating   the   little   word   some  as   an   indeterminate 
adjective  of  selection,  to  which  we  assign  a  symbol  like 
any  other  adjective,  let 

A  =  some 
B  =  nebulas 

C  =  giving  continuous  spectra 
D  =  heated  solid, 
The  premises  then  become 

D  =  DC  (i) 

AB  =  ABc.  (2) 

Now   from   (i)   we   obtain  by  the    Indirect  method  the 
Contrapositive 

c  =  cd, 
and  if  we  substitute  this  expression  for  c  in  (2)  we  have 

AB  =  ABcrf; 

the  full  meaning  of  which  is  that  '  some  nebulae  do  not 
give  continuous  spectra  and  are  not  solids/ 

We  might  similarly  apply  the  contrapositive  in  many 
other  instances.  Take  the  argument — '  All  fixed  stars 
are  self-luminous  ;  but  some  of  the  heavenly  bodies  are 
not  self-luminous,  an,d  are  therefore  not  fixed  stars.' 
Taking  our  terms 

A  =  fixed  stars 
B  =  self-luminous 


THE  INDIRECT  METHOD  OF  INFERENCE.  101 

C  =  some 

D  =  heavenly  bodies, 
we  have  the  premises 

A  -  AB,  (i) 

CD  =  bCV.  (2) 

Now  from  (i)  we  can  draw  the  Contrapositive 

b  =  ab, 
and  substituting  this  expression  for  b  in  (2)  we  obtain 

CD  =  a&CD, 

which  expresses  the  conclusion  of  the  argument  that 
*  some  heavenly  bodies  are  not  fixed  stars.' 

Contrapositive  of  a  Simple  Identity. 

The  reader  should  carefully  note  that  when  we  apply 
the  process  of  Indirect  Inference  to  a  simple  identity 
of  the  form 

A  =  B, 

we  may  obtain  further  results.  If  we  wish  to  know 
what  is  the  term  not-B,  we  have  as  before,  by  the  Law  of 
Duality, 

b  =  A6  -I-  ab, 
and  substituting  for  A  we  obtain 

b  =  B6  |  ab  =  ab. 
But  we  may  now  also  draw  a  second  Contrapositive  ;  for 

we  have 

a  =  aB  -|-  ab, 
and  substituting  for  B  its  equivalent  A  we  have 

a  =  aA.  •[  ab  =  ab. 

Hence  from  the  single  identity  A  =  B  we  can  draw 
the  two  propositions 

a  =  ab 
b  =  ab, 

and  observing  that  these  propositions  have  a  common 
term  we  can  make  a  new  substitution,  getting 

a  =  b. 


102  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

This  result  is  in  strict  accordance  with  the  fundamental 
principles  of  inference,  and  it  may  be  a  question  whether 
it  is  not  a  self-evident  result,  independent  of  the  steps  of 
deduction  by  which  we  have  reached  it.  For  where  two 
classes  are  coincident  like  A  and  B,  whatever  is  true 
of  the  one  is  true  of  the  other  ;  what  is  excluded  from 
the  one  must  be  excluded  from  the  other  similarly. 
Now  as  a  bears  to  A  exactly  the  same  relation  that  b 
bears  to  B,  the  identity  of  either  pair  follows  from  the 
identity  of  the  other  pair.  In  every  identity,  equality, 
or  similarity,  we  may  argue  from  the  negative  of  the 
one  side  to  the  negative  of  the  other.  Thus  at  ordinary 
temperatures 

Mercury  =  liquid-metal, 
hence  obviously 

Not-mercury  =  not-liquid-metal ; 
or  since 

Sirius  =  brightest  fixed  star, 

it  follows  that  whatever  star  is  not  the  brightest  is  not 
Sirius,  and  vice  versd.  Every  correct  definition  is  of  the 
form  A  =  B,  and  may  often  require  to  be  applied  in  the 
equivalent  negative  form. 

Let  us  take  as  an  illustration  of  the  mode  of  using  this 
result  the  argument  following : — 

Vowels  are  letters  which  can  be  sounded  alone,  (i) 
The  letter  w  cannot  be  sounded  alone  ;  (2) 

Therefore  the  letter  w  is  not  a  vowel.  (t\ 

Here  we  have  a  definition  (i),  and  a  comparison  of  a 
thing  with  that  definition  (2),  leading  to  exclusion  of  the 
thing  from  the  class  defined. 
Taking  the  terms 
A  =  vowel, 

3  =  letter  which  can  be  sounded  alone, 
C  =  letter  w, 


THE  INDIRECT  METHOD  OF  INFERENCE.          103 

the  premises  are  plainly  of  the  form 

A  =  B,  (i) 

C  =  60.  (2) 

Now  by  the    Indirect   method  we    obtain   from   (i)   the 
Contrapositive 

b  =  a, 
and  inserting  in  (2)  the  equivalent  for  b  we  have 

C  =  aO,  (3) 

or  '  the  letter  w  is  not  a  vowel/ 


Miscellaneous  Examples  of  the  Method. 

We  can  apply  the  Indirect  Method  of  Inference  how 
ever  many  may  be  the  terms  involved  or  the  premises 
containing  those  terms.  As  the  working  of  the  method 
is  best  learnt  from  examples,  I  will  take  a  case  of  two 
premises  forming  the  syllogism  Barbara  :  thus 

Iron  is  a  metal  (i) 

Metal  is  element.  (2) 

If  we  want  to  ascertain  what  inference  is  possible  con 
cerning  the  term  Iron,  we  develop  the  term  by  the  Law 
of  Duality.  Iron  must  be  either  metal  or  not-metal ;  iron 
which  is  metal  must  be  either  element  or  not-elemerit ; 
and  similarly  iron  which  is  not-metal  must  be  either 
element  or  not-element.  There  are  then  altogether  four 
alternatives  among  which  the  description  of  iron  must  be 
contained  ;  thus 

Iron,  metal,  element,  (a) 

Iron,  metal,  not-element,  (/3) 

Iron,  not-metal,  element,  (7) 

Iron,  not-metal,  not-element.  (§) 

Our  first  premise  informs  us  that  iron  is  a  metal,  and  if 
we  substitute  this  description  in  (7)  and  (3)  we  shall  have 
self -contradictory  combinations.  Our  second  premise 


104  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

likewise  informs  us  that  metal  is  element,  and  applying 
this  description  to  (/3)  we  again  have  self-contradiction, 
so  that  there  remains  only  (a)  as  a  description  of  iron— 
our  inference  is 

Iron  =  iron,  metal,  element. 
To    represent    this    process    of    reasoning    in    general 

symbols,  let 

A  =  iron 

B  =  metal 
C  =  element. 

The  premises  of  the  problem  take  the  form 

A  =  AB  (i) 

B  -  BC.  (2) 

By  the  Law  of  Duality  we  have 

A  =  AB  -I-  A6  (3) 

A  =  AC  -I-  Ac.  (4) 

Now,  if  we  insert  for  A   in  the  second  side   of  (3)  its 

description    in   (4),   we    obtain    what    I    shall    call    the 

development  of  A 

A  =  ABO  -|-  ABc  -I-  A6C  I  Abe.  (5) 

Wherever  the  letters  A  or  B  appear  in  the  second  side 

of  (5)  substitute  their  equivalents  given  in  (i)  and  (2)  and 

the  results  at  full  length  are 

A  =  ABC  |  ABCc  !  AB6C  |  AB&Cc. 

The  last  three  alternatives  break  the  Law  of  Contradic 
tion,  so  that 

A  =  ABC  -I-  o  I  o  -I-  o 

A  =  ABC. 

This  conclusion  is,  indeed,  no  more  than  we  could  obtain  by 
the  direct  process  of  substitution ;  it  is  the  characteristic 
of  the  Indirect  process  that  it  gives  all  possible  logical 
conclusions,  both  those  which  we  have  previously  obtained, 
and  an  almost  infinite  number  of  others  of  which  the 
ancient  logic  took  little  or  no  account.  From  the  same 
premises,  for  instance,  we  can  obtain  a  description  of  the 


THE  INDIRECT  METHOD  OF  INFERENCE.  105 

class  not-element  or  c.  By  the  Law  of  Duality  we  can 
develop  c  into  four  alternatives,  thus — 

c  =  ABc  -I-  A6c  |  aBc  -|-  abc. 
Now  if  we  substitute  for  A  and  B  as  before,  we  get 

c  =  ABO  I  AB&c  -I-  aBCc  -|-  abc, 

and  striking  out  the  terms  which  break  the  Law  of  Contra 
diction  there  remains 

c  =  abc, 

or  what  is  not  element  is  also  not  iron  and  not  metal. 
This  Indirect  Method  of  Inference  thus  furnishes  a 
complete  solution  of  the  following  problem — Given  any 
number  of  logical  premises  or  conditions,  required  the 
description  of  any  class  of  objects,  or  any  term>  as  governed 
by  those  conditions. 

The    steps  of  the   process  of  inference   may  thus   be 
concisely  stated  : — 

1.  By  the  Law  of  Duality  develop  the  utmost  number 
of  alternatives  which  may  exist  in  the  description  of  the 
required  class  or  term  as  regards  the  terms  involved  in 
the  premises. 

2.  For  each  term  in  these  alternatives  substitute  its 
description  as  given  in  the  premises. 

3.  Strike  out  every  alternative  which  is  then  found  to 
break  the  Law  of  Contradiction, 

4.  The  remaining  terms  may  be  equated  to  the  term  in 
question  as  the  desired  description  or  inference. 

Abbreviation  of  the  Process. 

Before  proceeding  to  illustrations  of  the  use  of  this 
method,  I  must  point  out  how  much  its  practical  em 
ployment  can  be  simplified,  and.  how  much  more  easy  it 
is  than  would  appear  from  the  description.  When  we 
want  to  effect  at  all  a  complete  solution  of  a  logical 


106  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

problem  it  is  best  to  form,  in  the  first  place,  a  complete 
series  of  all  the  combinations  of  terms  involved  in  it. 
If  there  be  two  terms  A  and  B,  the  utmost  variety  of 
combinations  in  which  they  can  appear  are 

AB 

Ab 

aB 

ab. 

The  term  A  appears  in  the  first  and  second ;  B  in  the 
first  and  third ;  a  in  the  third  and  fourth ;  and  b  in  the 
second  and  fourth.  Now  if  we  have  any  premise,  say 

A  =  B, 

we  must  ascertain  which  of  these  combinations  would  be 
rendered  self-contradictory  by  substitution ;  the  second 
and  third  would  have  to  be  struck  out,  and  there  would 

remain 

AB 

ab. 
Hence  we  draw  the  following  inferences 

A  =  AB,    B  =  AB,    a  -  ab,    b  =  ab. 
Exactly  the  same  method  must  be  followed  where  a 
question  involves  a  greater  number  of  terms.     Thus  by 
the  Law  of  Duality  the  three  terms  A,  B,  C,  give  rise  to 
eight  conceivable  combinations,  namely 

ABC  .  («) 

ABc  (0) 

AbC  (7) 

Abe  (S) 

aBC  (e) 

aBc  (0 

abC  W 

abc.  (0) 

The  development  of  the  term  A  is  formed  by  the  first  four 
of  these ;  for  B  we  must  select  (a),  (/3),  (e),  (£) ;  C  consists 
of  («),  (?),  W  M  ;  b  of  (7),  (S),  (,),  (<9),  and  so  on. 


THE  INDIRECT  METHOD  OF  INFERENCE.  107 

Now  if  we  want  to  investigate  completely  the  meaning 
of  the  premises 

A  -  AB  (i) 

B  =  EC,  ,  (2) 

we  examine  each  of  the  eight  combinations  as  regards 
each  premise;  (7)  and  ($)  are  contradicted  by  (i),  and  (/3) 
and  (£)  by  (2),  so  that  there  remain  only 

ABC  (a) 

aBC  (e) 

abC  W 

ale.  (0) 

To  describe  any  term  under  the  conditions  of  the  premises 
(i)  and  (2),  we  have  only  to  draw  out  the  proper  com 
binations  from  this  list ;  thus — A  is  represented  only  by 

ABC  or 

A  =  ABC, 

similarly  c   —  ale. 

For  B  we  have  two  alternatives  thus  stated, 

B  =  ABC  I  aBC  ; 
and  for  I  we  have 

I  —  abC  •[  ale. 

When  we  have  a  problem  involving  four  distinct  terms 
we  need  to  double  the  number  of  combinations,  and  as 
we  add  each  new  term  the  combinations  become  twice  as 
numerous.  Thus 

A,  B  produce    four    combinations 

A,  B,  C,  „          eight 

A,  B,  C,  D  „          sixteen          „ 

A,  B,  C,  D,  E  „          thirty-two     „ 

A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  F          „  sixty-four      „ 

and  so  on. 

I  propose  to  call  any  such  series  of  combinations  the 
Logical  Alecedarium.  It  holds  in  logical  science  a  posi 
tion  of  importance  which  cannot  be  exaggerated.  As  we 
proceed  from  logical  to  mathematical  considerations  it  will 


108  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

become  apparent  that  there  is  a  close  connection  between 
these  combinations  and  the  most  fundamental  theorems  of 
mathematical  science.  For  the  convenience  of  the  reader 
who  may  wish  to  employ  the  abecedarium  in  logical 
questions,  I  have  had  printed  on  the  next  page  a  complete 
series  of  the  combinations  up  to  those  of  six  terms.  At 
the  very  commencement  in  the  first  column  is  placed  a 
single  letter  X  which  might  seem  to  be  superfluous.  This 
letter  serves  to  denote  that  it  is  always  some  higher  class 
which  is  divided  up.  Thus  the  combination  AB  really 
means  ABX,  or  that  part  of  some  larger  class,  say  X, 
which  has  the  qualities  of  A  and  B  present.  The  letter 
X  is  omitted  in  the  greater  part  of  the  table  merely  for 
the  sake  of  brevity  and  clearness.  In  a  later  chapter  on 
Combinations  it  will  become  apparent  that  the  intro 
duction  of  this  unit  class  is  requisite  in  order  to  com 
plete  the  analogy  with  the  Arithmetical  Triangle  there 
described. 

The  reader  ought  to  bear  in  mind  that  though  the 
abecedarium  seems  to  give  mere  lists  of  combinations, 
these  combinations  are  intended  in  every  case  to  con 
stitute  the  development  of  a  term  of  a  proposition. 
Thus  the  four  combinations  AB,  Afr,  aB,  ab  really  mean 
that  any  class  X  is  described  by  the  following  proposition, 

X  =  X  (AB  -I-  A6  !  aB  \  ab). 
If  we  select  the  A's,  we  obtain  the  following  proposition 

AX  =  X(AB  I  A6). 

Thus  whatever  group  of  combinations  we  treat  must  be 
conceived  as  part  of  a  higher  class,  summum  genus  or 
universe  symbolised  in  the  term  X ;  but  bearing  this  in 
mind,  it  is  needless  to  complicate  our  formulas  by  always 
introducing  the  letter.  All  inference  consists  in  passing 
from  propositions  to  propositions,  and  combinations  per  se 
have  no  meaning.  They  are  consequently  to  be  regarded 
in  all  cases  as  forming  parts  of  propositions. 


THE   LOGICAL   ABECEDAEIUM. 


i.             ii.             in,               ly.                  y. 

VI. 

X           AX           AB           ABC           ABCD 

ABODE 

a  X           Ab           A  Be           ABCd 

ABCDe 

a  B           Ab  C           ABcD 

A  B  C  d  E 

a    b           Abe           A  B  c  d 

A  B  C  d  e 

aB  C           AbC  D 

AB  cDE 

a  B  c           A  b  C  d 

A  B  c  D  e 

a  b  C           A  &  c  D 

AB  c  d  E 

a  b  c           Abed 

A  B  c  c?  e 

oBC  D 

A6CDE 

aB  C  d 

Ab  C  D  e 

a  B  c  D 

A  bC  d  E 

a  B  c  d 

A  6  C  d  e 

ab  G  D 

Ab  cD  E 

a  b  C  d 

A  b  c  D  e 

a  b  c  D 

Ab  c  d  E 

a  b  c  d 

A  b  c  d  e 

aBC  D  E 

aB  C  D  e 

aBC  d  E 

a  B  C  d  e 

a  B  c  D  E 

a  B  c  D  e 

a  B  c  d  E 

a  B  c  d  e 

a  b  C  DE 

a  b  C  D  e 

0  b  C  d  E 

a  b  C  d  e 

a  b  c  D  E 

a  b  c  D   e 

a  b  c  d  E 

a  b  c  d  e 

ABCDEF 
ABCDE/ 
ABCD  eF 
ABCDe/ 
ABCdEF 
AB  CdE/ 
A  BCdeF 
ABC  d e  f 
ABcDE  F 
ABc  DE/ 
A  BcD  eF 
ABcD  e  f 
ABcdE  F 
A  B  cdE/ 
ABcd  e  F 
A  B  c  d  e/ 
AfcCDEF 
A&CDE/ 
AfeCDeF 
A&CD  e  f 
A  b  G  d  E  F 
A&Crf  E/ 
A  bC  de  F 
A  b  C  d  e  f 
A&cDEF 
A&cD  E/ 
A&c  D  e  F 
A  b  c  D  e/ 
A&cdE  F 
Abe  d  E  / 
Ab  c d e  F 
A  b  c  d  e  f 
aBCDEF 
oBCDE/ 
a  B  C  D  e  F 
aB  C  D  e  f 
a  B  C  d  E  F 
aBCd  E/ 
a  B  C  d  e  F 
aB  C  d  e  f 
aB  cD  E  F 
aBcD  E  / 
aB  c  D  e  F 
a  B  c  D  e  f 
aB  cd  E  F 
aB  cd  E  / 
a  B  c  d  e  F 
a  B  c  d  e  f 
a&CDE  F 
afeC  D  E  / 
a&C  De  F 
ab  C  D  e  f 
a bC dE  F 
ab  C  d  E/ 
ab  C  d  e  F 
a  b  C  d  e  f 
ab  c  D  E  F 
ab  c  D  E  / 
a  &  c  D  e  F 
a  b  c  D  e  f 
a  b  c  d  E  F 
a  b  c  d  E  f 
a  b  c  d  e  F 
a  b  c  d  e  f 


110  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

In  a  theoretical  point  of  view  we  may  conceive  that  the 
abecedarium  is  always  extended  indefinitely.  Every  new 
quality  or  circumstance  which  can  belong  to  an  object, 
subdivides  each  combination  or  class,  so  that  the  number 
of  such  combinations  when  unrestricted  by  logical  con 
ditions  is  represented  by  an  indefinitely  high  power  of 
two.  The  extremely  rapid  increase  in  the  number  of  sub 
divisions  obliges  us  to  confine  our  attention  to  a  few 
circumstances  at  a  time. 

When  contemplating  the  properties  of  this  abecedarium, 
I  am  often  inclined  to  think  that  Pythagoras  perceived 
the  deep  logical  importance  of  duality  ;  for  while  unity 
was  the  symbol  of  identity  and  harmony,  he  described  the 
number  two  as  the  origin  of  contrasts,  or  the  symbol  of 
diversity,  division  and  separation.  The  number  four  or 
the  Tetractys  was  also  regarded  by  him  as  one  of  the  chief 
elements  of  existence,  for  it  represented  the  generating 
virtue  whence  come  all  combinations. 

In  one  of  the  golden  verses  ascribed  to  Pythagoras,  he 
conjures  his  pupil  to  be  virtuous6  : 

'By  him  who  stampt  The  Four  upon  the  Mind, 
Tlie  Four,  the  fount  of  Nature's  endless  stream.' 

Now  four  and  the  higher  powers  of  duality  do  represent 
in  this  logical  system  the  variety  of  combinations  which 
can  be  generated  in  the  absence  of  logical  restrictions.  The 
followers  of  Pythagoras  may  have  shrouded  their  master's 
doctrines  in  mysterious  and  superstitious  notions,  but  in 
many  points  these  doctrines  seem  to  have  some  basis  in 
logical  philosophy. 

The  Logical  Slate. 

To  a  person  who  has  once  comprehended  the  extreme 
significance  and  utility  of  the  Logical  Abecedarium,  the 

e  Whewell,  'History  of  the  Inductive  Sciences,'  vol.  i.  p.  222. 


THE  INDIRECT  METHOD  OF  INFERENCE.  Ill 

indirect  process  of  inference  becomes  reduced  to  the  repe 
tition  of  a  few  uniform  operations  of  classification,  selection, 
and  elimination  of  contradictories.  Logical  deduction  even 
in  the  most  complicated  questions  becomes  a  matter  of 
mere  routine,,  and  the  amount  of  labour  required  is  the 
only  impediment  when  once  the  meaning  of  the  premises 
is  rendered  clear.  But  the  amount  of  labour  is  often 
found  to  be  considerable.  The  mere  writing  down  of 
sixty-four  combinations  of  six  letters  each  is  no  small 
task,  and,  if  we  had  a  problem  of  five  premises,  each  of 
the  sixty-four  combinations  would  have  to  be  examined 
in  connection  with  each  premise.  The  requisite  com 
parison  is  often  of  a  very  tedious  character  and  consider 
able  chance  of  errors  thus  arises. 

I  have  given  much  attention  therefore  to  reducing  both 
the  manual  and  mental  labour  of  the  process,  and  I  shall 
describe  several  devices  which  may  be  adapted  for  saving 
trouble  and  risk  of  mistake. 

In  the  first  place,  as  the  same  sets  of  combinations 
occur  over  and  over  again  in  different  problems,  we  may 
avoid  the  labour  of  writing  them  out  by  having  the  sets 
of  letters  ready  printed  upon  small  sheets  of  writing  paper. 
It  has  also  been  suggested  by  a  correspondent  that,  if  any 
one  series  of  combinations  were  marked  upon  the  margin 
of  a  sheet  of  paper,  and  a  slit  cut  between  each  pair  of 
combinations,  it  would  be  easy  to  fold  down  any  particular 
combination,  and  thus  strike  it  out  of  view.  The  combi 
nations  consistent  with  the  premises  would  then  remain 
in  a  broken  series.  This  method  answers  sufficiently  well 
for  occasional  use. 

A  more  convenient  mode,  however,  is  to  have  the  series 
of  letters  shown  on  p.  109,  engraved  upon  a  common 
school  writing  slate,  of  such  a  size,  that  the  letters  may 
occupy  only  about  a  third  of  the  space  on  the  left  hand 
side  of  the  slate.  The  conditions  of  the  problem  can  then 


112  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

be  written  down  on  the  unoccupied  part  of  the  slate,  and 
the  proper  series  of  combinations  being  chosen,  the  contra 
dictory  combinations  can  be  struck  out  with  the  pencil. 
I  have  used  a  slate  of  this  kind,  which  I  call  a  Logical 
Slate,  for  more  than  ten  years,  and  it  has  saved  me  much 
trouble.  It  is  hardly  possible  to  apply  this  process  to 
problems  of  more  than  six  terms,  owing  to  the  large  num 
ber  of  combinations  which  would  require  examination ; 
thus  seven  terms  would  give  128  combinations,  eight 
terms  256,  nine  terms  512,  ten  terms  1024,  eleven  terms 
2048,  twelve  terms  4096,  and  so  on  in  geometrical  pro 
gression. 

Abstraction  of  Indifferent  Circumstances. 

There  is  a  simple  but  highly  important  process  of 
inference  which  enables  us  to  abstract,  eliminate  or  disre 
gard  all  circumstances  indifferently  present  and  absent. 
Thus  if  I  were  to  state  that  'a  triangle  is  a  figure  of 
three  sides,  with  or  without  equal  angles/  the  latter 
qualification  would  be  superfluous,  because  by  a  law  of 
thought  I  know  that  angles  must  be  either  equal  or 
unequal.  To  add  the  qualification  gives  no  new  know 
ledge  since  the  existence  of  the  two  alternatives  will  be 
understood  in  the  absence  of  any  information  to  the 
contrary.  Accordingly,  when  two  alternatives  differ  only 
as  regards  a  single  component  term  which  is  positive  in 
one  and  negative  in  the  other,  we  may  always  reduce 
them  to  one  term  by  striking  out  their  indifferent  part. 
It  is  really  a  process  of  substitution  which  enables  us 
to  do  this ;  for  having  any  proposition  of  the  form 

A  =  ABC  -|-  ABc,  (i) 

we  know  by  the  Law  of  Duality  that 

B  =  BC  -|-  Be.  (2) 

Hence  AB  =  ABC  |   ABc.  (3) 


THE  INDIRECT  METHOD  OF  INFERENCE.  113 

And  as  the  second  member  of  this  is  identical  with  the 
second  member  of  (  i  )  we  may  substitute,  obtaining 

A  =  AB. 

This  process  of  reducing  useless  alternatives,  may  be 
applied  again  and  again  ;  for  it  is  plain  that 

A  =  AB  (CD  |  Cd  -I-  cD  !  cd) 

communicates  no  more  information  than  that  A  is  B. 
This  abstraction  of  indifferent  terms  is  in  fact  the  con 
verse  process  to  that  of  development  described  in  p.  104  ; 
and  it  is  one  of  the  most  important  operations  in  the 
whole  sphere  of  reasoning. 

The  reader  should  observe  that  in  the  proposition 


we  cannot  abstract  C  and  infer 

A  =  B; 
but  from 

AC  |   Ac  =  BC  I   Be 

we  may  abstract  all  reference  to  the  term  C. 

Illustrations  of  the  Indirect  Method. 

An  infinite  variety  of  arguments  and  logical  problems 
might  be  introduced  here  to  show  the  comprehensive 
character  and  powers  of  the  Indirect  Method.  We  can 
treat  either  a  single  premise  or  a  series  of  premises. 

Take  in  the  first  place  a  simple  definition,  such  as  '  a 
triangle  is  a  three-sided  rectilinear  figure.'     Let 
A  =  triangle 
B  —  three-sided 
C  =  rectilinear  figure, 
then  the  definition  is  of  the  form 

A-  BC. 

If  we  take  the  series  of  eight  combinations  of  three 
letters  (see  p.  106)  and  strike  out  those  which  are 

I 


114  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

inconsistent  mth  the  definition,  we  have  the  following 

result : — 

ABC  -*%&- 

«Bc. 


Abe  a&c. 

For  the  description  of  the  class  C  we  have 

C  -  ABC  -I-  a&C, 

that  is,  '  a  rectilinear  figure  is  either  a  triangle  and  three- 
sided,  or  not  a  triangle  and  not  three-sided.' 
For  the  class  &  we  have 

I  =  a&C  I  a&c. 

To  the  second  side  of  this  we  may  apply  the  process  of 
simplification  by  abstraction  described  in  the  last  section  ; 
for  by  the  Law  of  Duality 

a&  =  a&C  I  a&c  ; 

and  as  we  have  two  propositions  identical  in  the  second 
side  of  each  we  may  substitute,  getting 

&  =  a&, 

or  what  is  not  three-sided  is  not  a  triangle  (whether  it  be 
rectilinear  or  not). 

Let  us  treat  by  this  method  the  following  argument  :— 
*  Blende  is  not  an  elementary  substance  ;  elementary 
substances  are  those  which  are  undecomposable ; 
blende,  therefore,  is  decomposable.' 
Taking  our  letters  thus — 
A  =  blende, 

B  =  elementary  substance, 
C  =  undecomposable, 
the  premises  are  of  the  form 

A  =  A&,  (i) 

B  =  C.  (2) 

No  immediate  substitution  can  be  made ;  but  if  we  take 
the  contrapositive  of  (2),  namely 

&  =  c,  (3) 


THE  INDIRECT  METHOD  OF  INFERENCE.  115 

we  can  substitute  in  ( i )  obtaining  the  conclusion 

A  -  Ac. 

But  the  same  result  may  be  obtained  by  taking  the 
eight  combinations  of  A,  B,  0,  of  the  abecedarium  ;  it  will 
be  found  that  only  three  combinations,  namely 

Kbc 
aBC 
abc, 
are  consistent  with  the  premises,  whence  it  results  that 

A  —  Abc, 
or  by  the  process  of  Ellipsis  before  described  (p.  69) 

A  -  Ac. 

As  a  somewhat  more  complex  example  I  take  the 
argument  thus  stated,  one  which  could  not  be  thrown 
into  the  syllogistic  form. 

'  All  metals  except  gold  and  silver  are  opaque  ;  there 
fore  what  is  not  opaque  is  either  gold  or  silver 
or  is  not-metal/ 

There  is  more  implied  in  this  statement  than  is  dis 
tinctly  asserted,  the  full  meaning  being  as  follows  : 

All  metals  not  gold  or  silver  are  opaque,          ( i ) 
Gold  is  not  opaque  but  is  a  metal.  (2) 

Silver  is  not  opaque  but  is  a  metal,  (3) 

Gold  and  silver  are  distinct  substances.  (4) 

Taking  our  letters  thus— 

A  =  metal  C  =  silver 

B  =  gold  D  =  opaque, 

we  may  state  the  premises  in  the  form 

Kbc  =  A&cD  (i) 

B  -  ABd  (2) 

C  =  ACd  (3) 

B  -  Be.  (4) 

To  obtain  a  complete  solution  of  the  question  we  take 
the  sixteen  combinations  of  A,  B,  C,  D,  and  striking  out 

i  2 


116  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

those   which   are   inconsistent  with   the   premises,  there 

remain  only 

ABcd 

AbCd 


abcD 
abed. 

The  expression  for  not-opaque  things  consists  of  the 
three  combinations  containing  d,  thus 

d  =  ABcd  -I-  AbCd  •[  abed, 
or  d  =  Ad  (Be  -|-  bC)  •{•  abed. 

In  ordinary  language,  what  is  not-opaque  is  either 
metal  which  is  gold,  and  then  not-silver,  or  silver  and  then 
not  gold,  or  else  it  is  not-metal  and  neither  gold  nor  silver. 
A  good  example  for  the  illustration  of  the  Indirect 
Method  is  to  be  found  in  De  Morgan's  Formal  Logic  (p. 
123),  the  premises  being  substantially  as  follows  :— 

From  A  follows  B,  and  from  C  follows  D  ;  but  B  and 
D  are  inconsistent  with  each  other ;  therefore  A  and  C 
are  inconsistent. 

The  meaning  no  doubt  is  that  where  A  is,  B  will  be 
found,  or  that  every  A  is  a  B,  and  similarly  every  C  is  a  D  ; 
but  B  and  D  cannot  occur  together.  The  premises  there 
fore  appear  to  be  of  the  form 

A  =  AB,  (i) 

C  =  CD,  (2) 

B  =  Brf.  (3) 

On  examining  the  series  of  sixteen  combinations,  but  five 
are  found  to  be  consistent  with  the  above  conditions, 
namely, 

ABcd 
dBcd 
abCD 
abcD 
abed. 


THE  INDIRECT  METHOD  OF  INFERENCE.          117 

In  these  combinations  the  only  A  which  appears  is 
joined  to  c,  and  similarly  C  is  joined  to  a,  or  A  is  incon 
sistent  with  C. 

A  more  complex  argument,  also  given  by  De  Morgan f, 
contains  five  terms,  and  is  as  stated  below,  except  that  I 
have  altered  the  letters. 

'  Every  A  is  one  only  of  the  two  B  or  C  ;  D  is  both  B 
and  C,  except  when  B  is  E,  and  then  it  is 
neither  ;  therefore  no  A  is  D/ 

A   little  reflection  will  show  that  these  premises  are 
capable  of  expression  in  the  following  symbolic  forms — 
A  =  ABc  -|-  A30,  (i) 

DP  -  DeBC,  (2) 

'  \*j/ 

As  five  letters,  A,  B,  C,  D,  E3  enter  into  these  premises  it 

is  requisite  to  treat  their  thirty-two  combinations,  and  it 
will  be  found  that  fourteen  of  them  remain  consistent  with 
the  premises,  namely 

ABcc?E  aBCDe  a&Cc£E 

ABccfe  aBC<iE  abGde 

A6Cc£E  ciBCde  a&cDE 

A&.Cc^      •        aBccffi  abcd^t 

aRcde  abode. 

Now  if  we  examine  the  first  four  combinations,  all  of 
which  contain  A,  we  find  that  they  none  of  them  contain 
D  ;  or  again  if  we  select  those  which  contain  D,  we  have 

only  two,  thus — 

D  -  aBCDe  I  a&dDE. 

Hence  it  is  clear  that  no  A  is  D,  and  vice  versd  no  D  is  A. 
We  might  also  draw  many  other  conclusions  from  the 
premises  ;  for  instance— 

DE  —  a&cDE, 
or  D  and  E  never  meet  but  in  the  absence  of  A,  B,  and  C. 

f  '  Formal  Logic,'  p.  124. 


118  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

Fallacies  analysed  by  the  Indirect  Method. 

It  has  been  sufficiently  shown,  perhaps,  that  we  can  by 
the  Indirect  Method  of  Inference  extract  the  whole  truth 
from  any  series  of  propositions,  and  exhibit  it  anew  in  any 
required  form  of  conclusion.  But  it  may  also  need  to  be 
shown  by  examples  that  so  long  as  we  follow  correctly 
the  almost  mechanical  rules  of  the  method,  we  cannot  fall 
into  any  of  the  common  fallacies  or  paralogisms  which  are 
not  seldom  committed  in  ordinary  discussion.  Let  us 
take  the  example  of  a  fallacious  argument,  previously 
treated  by  the  Method  of  Direct  Inference  (p.  75), 

Granite  is  not  a  sedimentary  rock,  ( i ) 

Basalt  is  not  a  sedimentary  rock,  (2) 

and  let  us  ascertain  whether  any  precise  conclusion  can  be 
drawn  concerning  the  relation  of  granite  and  basalt. 

Taking  as  before 

A  =  granite, 

B  =  sedimentary  rock, 
C  =  basalt, 

the  premises  become      A  =  Ab,  (i) 

C  =  Cb.  (2) 

Of  the  eight  conceivable  combinations  of  A,  B,  C,  five  agree 
with  these  conditions,  namely 

A6C  aBc 

Abc  a&C 

abc  ; 
the  description  of  granite  is  found  to  be 

A  -  A&C  I  Abc  =  Ab(G  |  c), 

that  is,  granite  is  not  a  sedimentary  rock  but  is  either 
basalt  or  not-basalt.  If  we  want  a  description  of  basalt 
the  answer  is  of  like  form 

C  =  A&C!  a&C  =  bC  (A  |  a). 

Basalt  is  a  sedimentary  rock,  and  either  granite  or  not- 
granite.     As  it  is  already   perfectly  evident  that  basalt 


THE  LOGICAL  ABACUS.  119 

must  be  either  granite  or  not,  and  vice  versd,  the  premises 
fail  to  give  us  any  information  on  the  point,  that  is  to  say 
the  Method  of  Indirect  Inference  saves  us  from  falling 
into  any  fallacious  conclusions.  This  example  sufficiently 
illustrates  both  the  fallacy  of  Negative  premises  and  that 
of  Undistributed  Middle  of  the  old  logic  (pp.  75-77). 

The  fallacy  called  the  Illicit  Process  of  the  Major  Term 
is  also  incapable  of  commission  in  following  the  rules  of 
the  method.  Our  example  was  (p.  77) 

All  planets  are  subject  to  gravity,  (i) 

Fixed  stars  are  not  planets.  (2) 

The  false  conclusion  is  that  '  fixed  stars  are  not  subject  to 
gravity.'  The  terms  are 

A  —  planet 

B  =  fixed  star 

C  =  subject  to  gravity. 

And  the  premises  are      A  =  AC,  (i) 

B  =  «B.  (2) 

The  combinations  which  remain  uncontradicted  on  com 
parison  with  these  premises  are 


aBC  a&O 

abc. 

For  fixed  star  we  have  the  description 
B  =  aBC  -I-  aBc, 

that  is,  '  a  fixed  star  is  not  a  planet,  but  is  either  subject 
or  not,  as  the  case  may  be,  to  gravity/ 

The  Logical  Abacus. 

The  Indirect  Method  of  Inference  has  now  been  suffi 
ciently  described,  and  a  careful  examination  of  its  powers 
will  show  that  it  is  capable  of  giving  a  full  analysis  and 
solution  of  every  question  involving  any  simply  logical 
relations.  The  chief  difficulty  of  the  method  consists  in 
the  great  number  of  combinations  which  may  have  to  be 


120  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

examined;  not  only  may  the  requisite  labour  become 
formidable,  but  a  considerable  chance  of  mistake  may 
arise.  I  have  therefore  given  much  attention  to  modes 
of  facilitating  the  work,  and  have  succeeded  in  reducing 
the  method  to  an  almost  mechanical  form.  It  soon 
appeared  obvious  that  if  the  conceivable  combinations 
of  the  abecedarium,  for  any  number  of  letters,  instead 
of  being  printed  in  fixed  order  on  a  piece  of  paper  or 
slate,  were  marked  upon  light  moveable  pieces  of  wood, 
mechanical  arrangements  could  readily  be  devised  for 

O  v 

selecting  the  combinations  in  any  required  order.  The 
labour  of  comparison  and  rejection  might  thus  be  im 
mensely  reduced.  This  idea  was  first  carried  out  in  the 
Logical  Abacus,  which  I  have  found  useful  in  the  lecture- 
room  for  exhibiting  the  complete  solution  of  logical 
problems.  A  minute  description  of  the  construction  and 
use  of  the  abacus,  together  with  figures  of  the  parts,  has 
already  been  given  in  my  essay  called  The  Substitution  of 
Similars  s,  and  I  will  here  give  only  a  general  description. 

The  abacus  consists  of  a  common  school  black-board 
placed  in  a  sloping  position  and  furnished  with  four 
horizontal  and  equi-distant  ledges.  The  combinations  of 
the  letters  shown  in  the  first  four  columns  of  the  abece 
darium  (see  p.  109),  are  printed  in  somewhat  large  type, 
so  that  each  letter  is  about  an  inch  from  the  neighbour 
ing  one,  but  the  letters  are  placed  one  above  the  other 
instead  of  being  in  horizontal  lines  as  in  p.  109.  Each 
combination  of  letters  is  separately  fixed  to  the  surface 
of  a  thin  slip  of  wood  one  inch  broad  and  about  one- 
eighth  inch  thick.  Short  steel  pins  are  then  driven  in  an 
inclined  position  into  the  wood.  When  a  letter  is  a  large 
capital  representing  a  positive  term,  the  pin  is  fixed  in 
the  upper  part  of  its  space ;  when  the  letter  is  a  small 

g  Pp-  55-59.81-86. 


THE  LOGICAL  ABACUS. 


121 


italic  representing  a  negative  term,  the  pin  is  fixed  in 
the  lower  part  of  the  space.  Now,  if  one  of  the  series  of 
combinations  be  ranged  upon  a  ledge  of  the  black-board, 
the  sharp  edge  of  a  flat  rule  can  be  inserted  beneath  the 
pins  belonging  to  any  one  letter — say  A,  so  that  all  the 
combinations  marked  A  can  be  lifted  out  and  placed  upon 
a  separate  ledge.  Thus  we  have  represented  the  act  of 
thought  which  separates  the  class  A  from  what  is  not- A. 
The  operation  can  be  repeated ;  out  of  the  A's  we  can  in 
like  manner  select  those  which  are  B,  obtaining  the  AB's  ; 
and  in  like  manner  we  might  select  any  other  class  such 
as  the  aB's,  the  ab's  or  the  abcs. 

If  now  we  take  the  series  of  eight  combinations  of  the 
letters  A,  B,  C,  a,  b,  c,  and  wish  to  analyse  the  argument 
anciently  called  Barbara,  having  the  premises 

A  =  AB  (i) 

B  =  BC,  (2) 

•we  proceed  as  follows  : — Firstly  we  raise  the  combinations 
marked  a,  leaving  the  A's  behind ;  out  of  these  A's  we 
move  to  a  lower  ledge  such  as  are  not-B's,  and  to  the 
remaining  AB's  we  join  the  a's  which  have  been  raised. 
The  result  is  that  we  have  divided  all  the  combinations 
into  two  classes,  namely,  the  A&'s  which  are  incapable  of 
existing  consistently  with  premise  (i),  and  the  combina 
tions  which  are  consistent  with  the  premise.  Turning 
now  to  the  second  premise,  we  raise  out  of  those  which 
agree  with  (i)  the  b's,  then  we  lower  the  Bc's ;  lastly  we 
join  the  b's  to  the  BC's.  We  should  now  find  our  com 
binations  arranged  as  below. 


A 

a 

a 

a 

B 

B 

b 

b 

C 

C 

C 

c 

A 

A 

A 

a 

B 

b 

6 

B 

c 

C 

c 

c 

122  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

The  lower  line  contains  all  the  combinations  which  are 
inconsistent  with  either  premise  ;  we  have  carried  out  in 
a  mechanical  manner  that  exclusion  of  self-contradictories 
which  was  formerly  done  upon  the  slate  or  paper.  Ac 
cordingly,  from  the  remaining  combinations  in  the  upper 
line  we  can  draw  any  inference  which  the  premises  yield. 
If  we  raise  the  A's  we  find  only  one,  and  that  is  C,  so  that 
A  must  be  C.  If  we  select  the  c's  we  again  find  only 
one  which  is  a  and  also  &,  so  that  we  prove  that  not-C  is 
not-A  and  not-B. 

When  a  disjunctive  proposition  occurs  among  the 
premises  the  requisite  movements  become  rather  more 
complicated.  Take  the  disjunctive  argument 

A  is  either  B  or  C  or  D, 

A  is  not  C  and  not  D, 

Therefore  A  is  B. 
The  premises  are  represented  accurately  as  follows  :-— 

A  =  ABI  AC  I  AD  (i) 

A  =  Ac  (2) 

A  -  Ad,  (3) 

As  there  are  four  terms  we  choose  the  series  of  sixteen 
combinations  and  place  them  on  the  highest  ledge  of  the 
board  but  one.  We  raise  the  as  and  lower  the  6's.  But 
we  are  not  to  reject  all  the  Afr's  as  contradictory,  because 
by  the  first  premise  A's  may  be  either  B's  or  C's  or  D's. 
Accordingly  out  of  the  A&'s  we  must  select  the  c's,  and 
out  of  these  again  the  d's,  so  that  only  Abed  will  remain 
to  be  rejected  finally.  Joining  all  the  other  fifteen  com 
binations  together  again  we  raise  the  a's  and  lower  the 
AC's,  and  thus  reject  the  combinations  inconsistent  with 
(2) ;  similarly  we  reject  the  AD's  which  are  inconsistent 
with  (3).  It  will  be  found  that  there  remain  in  addition 
to  all  the  eight  combinations  containing  a  only  one  con 
taining  A,  namely 

ABcc/, 


THE  LOGICAL  MACHINE. 


whence  it  is  apparent  that  A  must  be  B,  the  true  conclusion 
of  the  argument. 

In  my  previous  Essay11  I  have  described  the  working  of 
two  other  logical  problems  upon  the  abacus,  which  it 
would  be  tedious  to  repeat  in  this  place. 

The  Logical  Machine. 

Although  the  Logical  Abacus  considerably  reduced  the 
labour  of  using  the  Indirect  Method,  it  was  not  free  from 
the  possibility  of  error.  I  thought  moreover  that  it  would 
afford  a  conspicuous  proof  of  the  generality  and  power  of 
the  method  if  I  could  reduce  it  to  a  purely  mechanical 
form.  Logicians  had  long  been  accustomed  to  speak  of 
Logic  as  an  Organoii  or  Instrument,  and  even  Bacon,  while 
he  rejected  the  old  syllogistic  logic,  had  insisted,  in  the 
second  aphorism  of  his  '  New  Instrument/  that  the  mind 
required  some  kind  of  systematic  aid.  In  the  kindred 
science  of  mathematics  mechanical  assistance  of  one  kind 
or  another  had  long  been  employed.  Orreries,  globes, 
mechanical  clocks,  and  such  like  instruments,  are  really 
aids  to  calculation  and  are  of  considerable  antiquity.  The 
arithmetical  machine  of  Pascal  is  more  than  two  centuries 
old,  having  been  constructed  in  1642-45.  M.  Thomas  of 
Colmar  has  recently  manufactured  an  arithmetical  machine 
on  Pascal's  principles  which  is  extensively  employed  by 
engineers  and  others  who  need  frequently  to  multiply  or 
divide.  To  Babbage,  however,  was  entirely  due  the 
merit  of  embodying  the  Calculus  of  Differences  in  a 
machine,  which  thus  became  capable  of  calculating  the 
most  complicated  tables  of  figures.  It  seemed  strange 
that  in  the  more  intricate  science  of  quantity  mechanism 
could  be  applicable,  whereas  in  the  simple  science  of 

11  '  Substitution  of  Similars,'  pp.  56-59. 


124  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 


qualitative  reasoning,  the  syllogism  was  only  by  analogy 
or  simile  called  an  Instrument.  Swift  satirically  described 
the  Professors  of  Laputa  as  in  possession  of  a  thinking 
machine,  and  in  1851  Mr.  Alfred  Smee  actually  proposed 
the  construction  of  a  Relational  machine  and  a  Differential 
machine,  the  first  of  which  would  be  a  mechanical  dic 
tionary  and  the  second  a  mode  of  comparing  ideas ;  but 
with  these  exceptions  I  have  not  yet  met  with  so  much 
as  a  suggestion  of  a  reasoning  machine.  It  may  be  added 
that  Mr.  Smee's  designs,  though  highly  ingenious,  appear 
impracticable,  and  in  any  case  do  not  attempt  the  per 
formance  of  logical  inference1. 

The  Logical  Abacus  soon   suggested  the  notion  of  a 

o  oo 

Logical  Machine,  which,  after  two  unsuccessful  attempts, 
I  succeeded  in  constructing  in  a  comparatively  simple  and 
effective  form.  The  details  of  the  Logical  Machine  have 
been  fully  described  by  the  aid  of  plates  in  the  Phi 
losophical  Transactions k,  and  it  would  be  both  tedious 
and  needless  to  repeat  the  account  of  the  somewhat 
intricate  movements  of  the  machine  in  this  place. 

The  general  appearance  of  the  machine  is  shown  in  a 
plate  facing  the  title-page  of  this  volume.  It  somewhat 
resembles  a  very  small  upright  piano  or  organ,  and  has 
a  keyboard  containing  twenty-one  keys.  These  keys  are 
of  two  kinds,  sixteen  of  them  representing  the  terms  or 
letters  A,  a,  B,  -b,  C,  c,  D,  d,  which  have  so  often  been 
employed  in  our  logical  notation.  When  letters  occur 
on  the  left-hand  side  of  a  proposition,  formerly  called 
the  subject,  each  is  represented  by  a  key  on  the  left-hand 
half  of  the  keyboard  ;  but  when  they  occur  on  the  right- 

1  See  his  work  called  '  The  Process  of  Thought  adapted  to  Words  and 
Language,  together  with  a  description  of  the  Relational  and  Differential 
Machines.'  Also  'Philosophical  Transactions/  [1870]  vol.  160,  p.  518. 

k  '  Philosophical  Transactions,'  [1870]  vol.  160,  p.  497.  'Proceedings 
of  the  Royal  Society,'  vol.  xviii.  p.  166,  Jan.  20,  1870.  'Nature,'  vol.  i. 
T-  343- 


THE  LOGICAL  MACHINE. 


125 


hand  side,  or  as  it  used  to  be  called  the  predicate  of  the 
proposition,  the  letter  keys  on  the  right-hand  side  of  the 
keyboard  are  the  proper  representatives.  The  five  other 
keys  may  be  called  operation  keys,  to  distinguish  them 
from  the  letter  or  term  keys.  They  stand  for  the  stops, 
copula,  and  disjunctive  conjunctions  of  a  proposition.  The 
middle  key  of  all  is  the  copula,  to  be  pressed  when  the 
verb  is  or  the  sign  =  is  met.  The  extreme  right-hand 
key  is  called  the  Full  Stop,  because  it  should  be  pressed 
when  a  proposition  is  completed,  in  fact  in  the  proper 
place  of  the  full  stop.  The  extreme  left-hand  key  is 
used  to  terminate  an  argument  or  to  restore  the  machine 
to  its  initial  condition  ;  it  is  called  the  Finis  key.  The 
last  key  but  one  on  the  right  and  left  complete  the 
whole  series,  and  represent  the  conjunction  or  in  its  mi- 
exclusive  meaning,  or  the  sign  •(•  which  I  have  employed, 
according  as  it  occurs  in  the  right  or  left  hand  side 
of  the  proposition.  The  whole  keyboard  is  arranged 
as  shown  below — 


.°° 

1 

Left-hand  side  of  Proposition, 
or  Subject. 

,5 

0. 
O 
O 

Right-hand  side  of  Proposition, 
or  Predicate. 

PH 
O 

02 

"5 
& 

•1- 
Or 

d 

D 

c 

C 

b 

B 

a 

A 

A 

a 

B 

b 

C 

c 

D 

d 

•1- 
Or 

To  work  the  machine  it  is  only  requisite  to  press  the 
keys  in  succession  as  indicated  by  the  letters  and  signs 
of  a  symbolical  proposition.  All  the  premises  of  an  ar 
gument  are  supposed  to  be  reduced  to  the  simple  notation 
which  has  been  employed  in  the  previous  pages.  Taking- 
then  such  a  simple  proposition,  as 

A  =  AB, 

we   press    the   keys  A   (subject),   copula,   A   (predicate), 
B  (predicate),  and  full  stop. 


126 


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 


If  there  be  a  second  premise,  for  instance 


we  press  in  like  manner  the  keys  — 

B  (subj.),  copula,  B  (pred.),  C  (pred.),  full  stop. 
The  process  is  exactly  the  same  however  numerous  the 
premises  may  be.  When  they  are  completed  the  operator 
will  see  indicated  on  the  face  of  the  machine  the  exact 
combinations  of  letters  which  are  consistent  with  the 
premises  according  to  the  principles  of  thought. 

As  shown  in  the  figure  opposite  the  title-page,  the 
machine  exhibits  in  front  an  abecedarium  of  sixteen  com 
binations,  exactly  like  that  of  the  abacus,  except  that  the 
letters  of  each  combination  are  separated  by  a  certain 
interval.  After  the  above  problem  has  been  worked  upon 
the  machine  the  abecedarium  will  present  the  following 
appearance  — 


A 

A 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

B     B 


B      B 


6       b       I       b 


C 

G 

C 

C 

C 

C 

C 

c 

D 

d 

D 

d 

D 

d 

D 

d 

The  operator  will  collect  the  various  conclusions,  as  for 
instance  that  A  is  always  C,  that  not-C  is  not-B  and 
not- A ;  that  not-B  is  not- A  but  either  C  or  not-C,  as 
in  the  use  of  the  Logical  Slate  or  Abacus. 


THE  LOGICAL  MACHINE.  127 

Disjunctive  propositions  are  to  be  treated  in  an  exactly- 
similar  manner.  Thus,  to  work  the  premises 

A  =  AB  |  AC 
B  -l-  C  =  BD  |  CD, 
it  is  only  necessary  to  press  in  succession  the  keys 

A  (subj.),  copula,  A  (pred.),  B,   {  A,C,  full  stop. 
B  (subj.),  |   C,  copula,  B  (pred.),  D,  \  ,  C,  D,  full  stop. 
The  combinations  then  remaining  will  be  as  follows 
ABCD        aBOD 
ABcD          aBcD 
A&CD         a&CD 
abcD 
abed. 

On  pressing  the  subject  key  A,  all  the  possible  com 
binations  which  do  not  contain  A  will  disappear,  and  the 
description  of  A  may  be  gathered  from  what  remains, 
namely  that  it  is  always  D.  The  full-stop  key  restores 
all  combinations  consistent  with  the  premises  and  any 
other  selection  may  be  made,  as  say  not-D,  which  will 
be  found  to  be  always  not- A,  not-B,  and  not-C. 

At  the  end  of  every  problem,  when  no  further  questions 
need  be  addressed  to  the  machine,  it  is  desirable  to  press 
the  Finis  key,  which  has  the  effect  of  bringing  into  view 
the  whole  of  the  conceivable  combinations  of  the  abece- 
darium.  This  key  in  fact  obliterates  the  conditions  im 
pressed  upon  the  machine  by  moving  back  into  their 
ordinary  places  those  combinations  which  had  been  re 
jected  as  inconsistent  with  the  premises.  Before  begin 
ning  any  new  problem  it  is  requisite  to  observe  that 
the  whole  sixteen  combinations  are  visible.  After  the 
Finis  key  has  been  used  the  machine  represents  a  mind 
endowed  with  powers  of  thought,  but  wholly  devoid 
of  knowledge.  It  would  not  in  that  condition  give  any 
answer  but  such  as  would  consist  in  the  primary  laws 
of  thought  themselves.  But  when  any  proposition  is 


128  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

worked  upon  the  keys,  the  machine  analyses  or  digests 
the  meaning  of  it  and  becomes  charged  with  the  know 
ledge  embodied  in  that  proposition.  Accordingly  it  is 
able  to  return  as  an  answer  any  description  of  a  term 
or  class  so  far  as  furnished  by  that  proposition  in  ac 
cordance  with  the  Laws  of  Thought.  The  machine  is 
thus  the  embodiment  of  a  true  logical  system.  The  com 
binations  are  classified,  selected  or  rejected  just  as  they 
should  be  by  a  reasoning  mind,  so  that  at  each  step  in 
a  problem,  the  abecedarium  represents  the  proper  con 
dition  of  a  mind  exempt  from  mistake.  It  cannot  be 
asserted  indeed  that  the  machine  entirely  supersedes  the 
agency  of  conscious  thought ;  mental  labour  is  required 
in  interpreting  the  meaning  of  grammatical  expressions 
and  in  correctly  impressing  that  meaning  on  the  machine ; 
it  is  further  required  in  gathering  the  conclusion  from 
the  remaining  combinations.  Nevertheless  the  true  pro 
cess  of  logical  inference  is  actually  accomplished  in  a 
purely  mechanical  manner. 

It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  the  machine  can  detect 
any  self-contradiction  existing  between  the  premises  pre 
sented  to  it,  for  it  will  then  be  found  that  one  or  more 
of  the  terms  disappear  entirely  from  the  abecedarium. 
Thus  if  we  worked  the  two  propositions,  A  is  B,  and 
A  is  not-B,  and  then  inquired  for  a  description  of  A, 
the  machine  would  refuse  to  give  it  by  exhibiting  no 
combination  at  all  containing  A.  This  result  is  in  agree 
ment  with  the  law  which  I  have  explained  that  every 
term  must  have  its  negative  (p.  88).  Accordingly  when 
ever  any  one  of  the  letters  A,  B,  C,  D,  a,  I,  c,  d  wholly 
disappears  from  the  abecedarium,  it  may  be  safely  inferred 
that  some  self-contradiction  has  been  committed  in  the 
premises. 

It  ought  to  be  carefully  observed  that  the  logical 
machine  cannot  receive  a  simple  identity  of  the  form 


THE  LOGICAL  MACHINE.  129 


A  —  B  except  in  the  double  form  of  A  =  AB  and  B  =  AB. 
To  work  the  proposition  A  =  B  it  is  therefore  necessary  to 
press  the  keys — A  (subj.),  Copula,  A  (pred.),  B  (pred.),  Full 
stop,  B  (subj.),  Copula,  A  (pred.),  B  (pred.),  Full  stop. 
The  same  double  operation  will  be  necessary  whenever 
the  proposition  is  not  of  the  kind  called  a  partial 
identity  (p.  47).  Thus  AB  -  CD,  AB  -  AC,  A  =  B  I  C 
A I  B  =  C I  D,  all  require  to  be  read  from  both  ends 
separately.  This  is  a  remarkable  fact  which  some  per 
sons  may  consider  as  militating  against  the  equational 
form  of  proposition,  but  I  do  not  think  this  is  really 
the  case. 

Before  leaving  the  subject  I  may  remark  that  these 
mechanical  devices  are  not  likely  to  possess  great  prac 
tical  utility.  We  do  not  require  in  common  life  to  be 
constantly  solving  complex  logical  questions.  Even  in 
mathematical  calculation  the  ordinary  rules  of  arithmetic 
are  generally  sufficient,  and  a  calculating  machine  could 
only  be  used  with  advantage  in  peculiar  cases.  But  the 
machine  and  abacus  have  nevertheless  two  important 
uses. 

i.  I  trust  that  the  time  is  not  very  far  distant  when 
the  predominance  of  the  ancient  Aristotelian  Logic  will 
be  a  matter  of  history,  and  the  teaching  of  logic  will 
be  placed  on  a  footing  more  worthy  of  its  supreme 
importance.  It  will  then  be  found  that  the  solution  of 
logical  questions  is  an  exercise  of  mind  at  least  as  valu 
able  and  necessary  as  mathematical  calculation.  I  believe 
that  these  mechanical  devices,  or  something  of  the  same 
kind,  will  then  become  useful  for  exhibiting  to  a  class 
of  students  a  clear  and  visible  analysis  of  logical  problems 
of  any  degree  of  complexity,  the  nature  of  each  step 
being  rendered  plain  to  the  eye.  For  this  purpose  I 
have  already  often  used  the  machine  or  abacus  in  my 
class  lectures  at  the  Owens  College. 


130  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

2.  The  more  immediate  importance  of  the  machine 
seems  to  consist  in  the  unquestionable  proof  which  it 
affords  that  most  comprehensive  views  of  the  principles 
of  reasoning  have  now  been  attained,  although  they  were 
almost  wholly  unknown  to  Aristotle  and  his  followers. 
The  time  must  come  when  the  inevitable  results  of  the 
admirable  writings  of  the  late  Dr.  Boole  must  be  re 
cognised  at  their  true  value,  and  the  plain  and  palpable 
form  in  which  the  machine  presents  those  results  will, 
I  hope,  hasten  the  time.  Undoubtedly  his  life  marks 
an  era  in  the  high  science  of  human  reason.  It  may 
seem  strange  that  it  had  remained  for  him  first  to  set 
forth  in  its  full  extent  the  problem  of  logic,  but  I  am 
not  aware  that  any  one  before  him  had  treated  logic 
as  a  symbolic  method  for  evolving  from  any  premises 
the  description  of  any  class  whatsoever  as  defined  by 
those  premises.  His  quasi-mathematical  system  indeed 
could  not  be  regarded  as  a  final  and  complete  solution 
of  the  problem.  Not  only  did  it  require  the  manipula 
tion  of  mathematical  symbols  in  a  very  intricate  arid 
perplexing  manner,  but  the  results  when  obtained  were 
devoid  of  demonstrative  force,  because  they  turned  upon 
the  employment  of  unintelligible  symbols,  acquiring  mean 
ing  only  by  analogy.  I  have  also  pointed  out  'that  he 
imported  into  his  system  a  condition  concerning  the 
exclusive  nature  of  alternatives  (p.  83),  which  is  not 
necessarily  true  of  logical  terms.  I  shall  have  to  show 
in  the  next  chapter  that  logic  is  really  the  basis  of 
the  whole  science  of  mathematical  reasoning,  so  that 
Boole  completely  inverted  the  true  order  of  proof 
when  he  proposed  to  infer  logical  truths  by  algebraic 
processes.  It  is  a  wonderful  evidence  of  his  mental 
power  that  by  methods  fundamentally  false  he  should 
have  succeeded  in  reaching  true  conclusions  and  widen 
ing  the  sphere  of  reason. 


THE  ORDER  OF  PREMISES.  131 

The  mechanical  performance  of  logical  inference  affords 
a  demonstration  both  of  the  truth  of  Boole's  results  and 
of  the  mistaken  nature  of  his  mode  of  deducing  them. 
Conclusions  which  he  could  only  obtain  by  pages  of 
intricate  calculation,  are  exhibited  by  the  machine  after 
one  or  two  minutes  of  manipulation.  And  not  only  are 
those  conclusions  easily  reached,  but  they  are  demon 
stratively  true,  because  every  step  of  the  process  involves 
nothing  more  obscure  that  the  Laws  of  Thought. 

The  Order  of  Premises. 

Before  quitting  the  subject  of  deductive  reasoning,  I 
may  remark  that  the  order  in  which  the  premises  of 
an  argument,  or  any  propositions  whatsoever,  are  placed, 
is  a  matter  of  logical  indifference.  Much  discussion  has 
taken  place  at  various  times  concerning  the  arrangement 
of  the  premises  of  a  syllogism  ;  and  it  has  been  generally 
held,  in  accordance  with  the  opinion  of  Aristotle,  that 
the  so-called  major  premise,  containing  the  major  term, 
or  the  predicate  of  the  conclusion,  should  stand  first. 
This  distinction  however  falls  to  the  ground  in  our  system, 
since  the  proposition  is  reduced  to  an  identical  form  in 
which  there  is  no  distinction  of  subject  and  predicate. 
In  a  strictly  logical  and  philosophic  point  of  view  the 
order  of  statement  is  whoUy  devoid  of  significance.  The 
premises  are  simultaneously  coexistent,  and  are  not  related 
to  each  other  according  to  any  of  the  properties  of  space 
or  time.  Just  as  the  qualities  of  the  same  object  are 
neither  before  nor  after  each  other  in  nature  (p.  40), 
and  are  only  thought  of  in  some  one  order  owing  to 
our  limited  capacity  of  mind,  so  the  premises  of  an 
argument  are  neither  before  nor  after  each  other,  and 
are  only  thought  of  in  succession  because  the  mind  can 
not  grasp  many  ideas  at  once.  The  logical  combinations 

K  2 


132  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

of  the  Abecedarian  are  exactly  the  same   in  whatever 
order  the    premises   be   treated   on  the   logical   slate    or 

machine. 

Some  difference  may  doubtless  exist  as  regards  con 
venience  to  human  memory.  The  mind  may  take  in 
the  results  of  an  argument  more  easily  in  one  mode  of 
statement  than  another,  although  there  is  no  real  differ 
ence  in  the  logical  results.  But  in  this  point  of  view 
I  think  that  Aristotle  and  the  old  logicians  were  clearly 
wrong.  It  is  more  easy  to  conclude  that  '  all  A's  are  C's ' 
from  '  all  A's  are  B's  and  all  B's  are  C's/  than  from 
the  same  propositions  in  inverted  order,  'all  B's  are  C's 
and  all  A's  are  B's.' 

The  Equivalency  of  Propositions. 

One  great  advantage  which  arises  from  the  study  of 
this  Indirect  Method  of  Inference  consists  in  the  clear 
notion  which  we  thus  gain  of  the  Equivalency  of  Propo 
sitions.  The  older  logicians  showed  how  from  certain 
simple  premises  we  might  draw  an  inference,  but  they 
failed  to  point  out  whether  that  inference  contained  the 
whole,  or  only  a  part,  of  the  information  embodied  in  the 
premises.  Now  any  one  proposition  or  group  of  propo 
sitions  may  be  classed  with  respect  to  another  proposition 
or  group  of  propositions,  as 

1.  Equivalent, 

2.  Inferrible, 

3.  Consistent, 

4.  Contradictory. 

Taking  the  proposition  '  All  men  are  mortals'  as  the 
original,  '  All  immortals  are  not  men '  is  its  equivalent ; 
'  Some  mortals  are  men '  is  inferrible,  or  capable  of  infe 
rence,  but  is  not  equivalent  ;  '  All  not  men  are  not 
mortals '  cannot  be  inferred,  but  is  consistent,  that  is,  may 


THE  EQUIVALENCY  OF  PROPOSITIONS.  133 

be  true  at  the  same  time  ;  '  All  men  are  immortals'  is  of 
course  contradictory. 

One  sufficient  test  of  equivalency  is  the  capability  of 
mutual  inference.     Thus  from 

All  electrics  =  all  non-conductors, 
I  can  infer 

All  non-electrics  =  all  conductors, 

and  vice  versa  from  the  latter  I  can  pass  back  to  the 
former.  In  short  A  =  B  is  equivalent  to  a  —  b.  Again, 
from  the  union  of  the  two  propositions,  A  =  AB  and 
B  =  AB,  I  get  A  —  B,  and  from  this  I  might  as  easily 
deduce  the  two  with  which  I  started.  In  this  case  one 
proposition  is  equivalent  to  two  other  propositions.  There 
are  indeed  no  less  than  four  modes  in  which  we  may 
express  the  identity  of  two  classes  A  and  B,  namely, 

FIRST    MODE.  SECOND    MODE.  THIRD    MODE.  FOURTH    MODE. 

1  a  =  ab 


A      -D  7 

A  =  D  a  =  o  T)      A  T>  r  1 

J3  —  AB  J  6  = 

The  Indirect  Method  of  Inference  furnishes  an  universal 
and  clear  criterion  as  to  the  relationship  of  propositions. 
The  import  of  a  statement  is  always  to  be  measured  by 
the  combinations  of  terms  which  it  destroys.  Hence  two 
propositions  are  exactly  equivalent  when  they  remove 
exactly  the  same  combinations  from  the  Abecedarium, 
and  neither  more  nor  less.  A  proposition  is  inferrible 
but  not  equivalent  to  another  when  it  removes  some  but 
riot  all  the  combinations  which  the  other  removes.  Again, 
propositions  are  consistent  provided  that  they  leave  some 
one  combination  containing  each  term,  and  the  negative 
of  each  term.  If  after  all  the  combinations  inconsistent 
with  two  propositions  are  struck  out,  there  still  appears 
in  the  Abecedarium  each  of  the  letters  A,  a,  B,  b,  C,  c,  D,  d, 
which  were  there  before,  then  no  inconsistency  between 
the  propositions  exists,  although  they  may  not  be  equiva 
lent  or  even  inferrible.  Finally,  contradictory  propositions 


134  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

are  those  which  altogether  remove  any  one  or  more  letter- 
terms  from  the  Abecedariurn. 

What  is  true  of  single  propositions  applies  also  to 
groups  of  propositions,  however  large  or  complicated ; 
that  is  to  say,  one  group  may  be  equivalent,  inferrible, 
consistent,  or  contradictory  as  regards  another,  and  we 
may  similarly  compare  one  proposition  with  a  group  of 
propositions. 

To  give  in  this  place  illustrations  of  all  the  four  kinds 
of  relation  would  require  much  space  :  as  the  examples 
given  in  previous  sections  or  chapters  may  serve  more  or 
less  to  explain  the  relations  of  inference,  consistency,  and 
contradiction,  I  will  only  add  a,  few  instances  of  equivalent 
propositions  or  groups. 

In  the  following  list  each  proposition  or  group  of  propo 
sitions  is  exactly  equivalent  in  meaning  to  the  correspond 
ing  one  in  the  other  column,  and  the  truth  of  this  state 
ment  may  be  tested  by  working  out  the  combinations  of 
the  Abecedarium,  which  ought  to  be  found  exactly  the 
same  in  the  case  of  each  pair  of  equivalents. 
A  =  A6  B  =  aB 

A  =  b  a  =  B 

A  =  BC  a  =  b\c 

A  =  AB  I  AC  b  =  ab  I  A&C 

A-|-B  =  C-|-D  ab  =  cd 

A  I   c  =  B  I-  d  aC  =  bV 

A  =  ABI AC 

A  =  ABc  I  A6C  A .~ 

AB  =  ABc 

A  =  Bl  A  =  B 

B  =  CJ  A-  C 

A  -  ABl  A  =  AC 

B  -  BCJ  B  =  AlaBC 

A  =  ABi 

A  -  AC  I  A  =  ABCD. 

A  =  AD-I 


THE  EQUIVALENCY  OF  PROPOSITIONS.  135 

Although  in  these  and  many  other  cases  the  equivalents 
of  certain  propositions  can  readily  be  given,  yet  I  believe 
that  no  uniform  and  infallible  process  can  be  pointed  out 
by  which  the  exact  equivalents  of  premises  can  be  ascer 
tained.  Ordinary  deductive  inference  usually  gives  us 
only  a  portion  of  the  contained  information.  It  is  true 
that  the  combinations  consistent  with  a  set  of  propositions 
are  logically  equivalent  to  them,  but  the  difficulty  consists 
in  passing  back  from  the  combinations  to  a  new  set  of 
propositions.  The  task  is  here  of  a  different  character 
from  any  which  we  have  yet  attempted.  It  is  in  reality 
an  inverse  process,  and  is  just  as  much  more  troublesome 
and  uncertain  than  the  direct  process,  as  seeking  is  com 
pared  with  hiding.  Not  only  may  several  different  answers 
equally  apply,  but  there  is  no  method  of  discovering  any 
of  those  answers  except  by  repeated  trial.  The  problem 
which  we  have  here  met  is  really  that  of  induction,  the 
inverse  of  deduction  ;  and,  as  I  shall  soon  show,  induction 
is  always  tentative,  and  unless  conducted  with  peculiar 
skill  and  insight  must  be  exceedingly  laborious  in  cases  of 
any  considerable  complexity. 

The  late  Professor  de  Morgan  was  unfortunately  led 
by  this  equivalency  of  propositions  into  the  most  serious 
error  of  his  ingenious  system  of  Logic.  He  held  that 
because  the  proposition  'All  A's  are  all  B's,'  was  but 
another  expression  for  the  two  propositions  'All  A's  are 
B's '  and  '  All  B's  are  As,'  it  must  be  a  composite  and  not 
really  an  elementary  form  of  proposition1.  But  on  taking 
a  general  view  of  the  equivalency  of  propositions  such  an 
objection  seems  to  have  no  weight.  Logicians  have,  with 
few  exceptions,  persistently  upheld  the  original  error  of 
Aristotle  in  rejecting  from  their  science  the  one  simple 

1  (  Syllabus  of  a  proposed  system  of  Logic,'  §§  57,  121,  &c.     'Formal 
Logic,'  p.  66. 


136  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

relation  of  identity  on  which  all  more  complex  logical  - 
relations  must  really  rest. 

The  Nature  of  Inference. 

The  question,  What  is  Inference  I  is  involved,  even  to 
the  present  day,  in  as  much  uncertainty  as  that  ancient 
question,  What  is  Truth  \  I  shall  in  more  than  one  part 
of  this  work  endeavour  to  show  that  inference  never  does 
more  than  explicate,  unfold,  or  develop  the  information 
contained  in  certain  premises  or  facts.  Neither  in  deduc 
tive  nor  inductive  reasoning  can  we  add  a  tittle  to  our 
implicit  knowledge,  which  is  like  that  contained  in  an 
unread  book  or  a  sealed  letter.  Sir  W.  Hamilton  has  well 
said,  '  Reasoning  is  the  showing  out  explicitly  that  a  pro 
position  not  granted  or  supposed,  is  implicitly  contained 
in  something  different  which  is  granted  or  supposed  m/ 

Professor  Bo  wen  has  explained11  with  much  clearness 
that  the  conclusion  of  an  argument  states  explicitly  what 
is  virtually  or  implicitly  thought.  '  The  process  of  reasoning 
is  not  so  much  a  mode  of  evolving  a  new  truth,  as  it  is  of 
establishing  or  proving  an  old  one,  by  showing  how  much 
was  admitted  in  the  concession  of  the  two  premises  taken 
together.'  It  is  true  that  the  whole  meaning  of  these 
statements  rests  upon  that  of  such  words  as  'explicit/ 
'implicit,'  'virtual.'  That  is  implicit  which  is  wrapped  up, 
and  we  render  it  explicit  when  we  unfold  it.  Just  as  the 
conception  of  a  circle  involves  a  hundred  important  geome 
trical  properties,  all  following  from  what  we  know,  if  we 
have  acuteness  to  unfold  the  results,  so  every  fact  and 
statement  involves  more  meaning  than  seems  at  first 
sight.  Reasoning  explicates  or  brings  to  conscious  posses 
sion  what  was  before  unconscious.  It  does  not  create,  nor 

m  Lectures  on  Metaphysics,  vol.  iv.  p.  369. 

n  Bowen,  '  Treatise  on  Logic/  Cambridge,  U.  S.,  1866;  p.  362. 


THE  NATURE  OF  INFERENCE.  137 

does  it  destroy,  but  it  transmutes  and  throws  the  same 
matter  into  a  new  form. 

The  difficult  question  still  remains,  Where  does  novelty 
of  form  begin  1  Is  it  a  case  of  inference  when  we  pass 
from  c  Sincerity  is  the  parent  of  truth '  to  '  The  parent  of 
truth  is  sincerity'?'  The  old  logicians  would  have  called 
this  change  conversion  one  case  of  immediate  inference. 
But  as  all  identity  is  necessarily  reciprocal,  and  the  very 
meaning  of  such  a  proposition  is  that  the  two  terms  are 
identical  in  their  signification,  I  fail  to  see  any  difference 
between  the  statements  whatever.  As  well  might  we  say 
that  a  =  b  and  b  =  a  are  different  equations. 

Another  point  of  difficulty  is  to  decide  when  a  change 
is  merely  grammatical  and  when  it  involves  a  real  logical 
transformation.  Between  a  table  of  wood  and  a  wooden 
table  there  is  no  logical  difference  (p.  37),  the  adjective 
being  merely  a  convenient  substitute  for  the  prepositional 
phrase.  But  it  is  uncertain  to  my  mind  whether  the 
change  from  '  All  men  are  mortal '  to  '  No  men  are  not 
mortal'  is  purely  grammatical.  Logical  change  may 
perhaps  be  best  described  as  consisting  in  the  determina- 
tjon  of  a  relation  between  certain  classes  of  objects  from 
a  relation  between  certain  other  classes.  Thus  I  consider 
it  a  truly  logical  inference  when  we  pass  from  '  All  men 
are  mortal '  to  '  All  immortals  are  not-men/  because  the 
classes  immortals  and  not-men  are  different  from  mortals 
and  men,  and  yet  the  propositions  contain  at  the  bottom 
the  very  same  truth,  as  shown  in  the  combinations  of  the 
Abecedarium. 

From  logical  inference  we  must  discriminate  the  passage 
from  the  qualitative  to  the  quantitative  form  of  a  pro 
position.  We  state  the  same  truth  when  we  say  that 
'  mortality  belongs  to  all  men,'  as  when  we  assert  that 
*  all  men  are  mortals.'  Here  we  do  not  pass  from  class  to 
class,  but  from  one  kind  of  term,  the  abstract,  to  another 


138  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

kind,  the  concrete.  But  inference  probably  enters  when 
we  pass  from  either  of  the  above  propositions  to  the 
assertion  that  the  class  of  immortal  men  is  zero,  or  con 
tains  no  objects. 

It  is  really  a  question  of  words  to  what  processes  we 
shall  or  shall  not  apply  the  name  '  inference/  and  I  have 
no  wish  to  continue  the  trifling  discussions  which  have 
already  taken  place  upon  the  subject.  We  shall  not 
commit  any  serious  error,  provided  that  we  always  bear 
in  mind  that  two  propositions  may  be  connected  together 
in  four  different  ways.  They  may  be— 

1 .  Tautologous  or  identical,  involving  the  same  relation 
between  the  same  terms  and  classes,  and  only  differing  in 
the  order  of  statement ;  thus  '  Victoria  is  the  Queen  of 
England'   is   tautologous  with    'The   Queen  of  England 
is  Victoria/ 

2.  Grammatically  equivalent,  in  which  the  classes  or 
objects  are  the  same  and  similarly  related,  and  the  only 
difference  is  in  the  words  ;  thus  '  Victoria  is  the  Queen 
of  England'  is  grammatically  equivalent  to  'Victoria  is 
England's  Queen.' 

3.  Equivalent   in   qualitative   and   quantitative    form, 
the   classes   being   the  same,  but  viewed   in  a  different 
manner. 

4.  Logically  equivalent,  when  the  classes  and  relations 
are   different,  but   involve   the   same   knowledge   of  the 
possible  combinations. 


CHAPTEE    VII. 


INDUCTION. 

WE  enter  in  this  chapter  upon  the  second  great  de 
partment  of  logical  method,  that  of  Induction  or  the 
Inference  of  general  from  particular  truths.  It  cannot 
be  said  that  the  Inductive  process  is  of  greater  importance 
than  the  Deductive  process  already  considered,  because  the 
latter  process  is  absolutely  essential  to  the  existence  of 
the  former.  Each  is  the  complement  and  counterpart  of 
the  other.  The  principles  of  thought  and  existence  which 
underlie  them  are  at  the  bottom  the  same,  just  as  subtrac 
tion  of  numbers  necessarily  rests  upon  the  same  principles 
as  addition.  Induction  is,  in  fact,  the  inverse  operation 
to  deduction,  and  cannot  be  conceived  to  exist  without 
the  corresponding  operation,  so  that  the  question  of  re 
lative  importance  cannot  arise.  Who  thinks  of  asking 
whether  addition  or  subtraction  is  the  more  important 
process  in  arithmetic  1  But  at  the  same  time  much 
difference  in  difficulty  may  exist  between  a  direct  and 
inverse  operation  ;  the  integral  calculus,  for  instance,  is 
almost  infinitely  more  difficult  than  the  differential  cal 
culus  of  which  it  is  the  inverse.  It  must  be  allowed 
that  in  logic  inductive  investigations  are  of  a  far  higher 
degree  of  difficulty,  variety,  and  complexity  than  any 
questions  of  deduction  ;  and  it  is  this  fact  no  doubt  which 
has  led  some  logicians  to  erroneous  opinions  concerning 
the  exclusive  importance  of  induction. 

Hitherto   we  have  been  engaged  in  considering  how 


140  THE  PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

from  certain  conditions,  laws,  or  identities  governing  the 
combinations  of  qualities,  we  may  deduce  the  nature  of 
the  combinations  agreeing  with  those  conditions.  Our 
work  has  been  to  unfold  the  results  of  what  is  contained 
in  any  statements,  and  the  process  has  been  one  of  Syn 
thesis.  The  terms  or  combinations  of  which  the  character 
has  been  determined  have  usually,  though  by  no  means 
always,  involved  more  qualities,  and  therefore,  by  the 
relation  of  extension  and  intension,  fewer  objects  than 
the  terms  in  which  they  were  described.  The  truths 
inferred  were  thus  usually  less  general  than  the  truths 
from  which  they  were  inferred. 

In  induction  all  is  inverted.  The  truths  to  be  ascer 
tained  are  more  general  than  the  data  from  which  they 
are  drawn.  The  process  by  which  they  are  reached  is 
analytical,  and  consists  in  separating  the  complex  com 
binations  in  which  natural  phenomena  are  presented  to 
us,  and  determining  the  relations  of  separate  qualities. 
Given  events  obeying  certain  unknown  laws,  we  have  to 
discover  the  laws  obeyed.  Instead  of  the  comparatively 
easy  task  of  finding  what  effects  will  follow  from  a  given 
law,  the  effects  are  now  given  and  the  law  is  required. 
We  have  to  interpret  the  will  by  which  the  conditions  of 
creation  were  laid  down. 

Induction  an  Inverse  Operation. 

I  have  already  asserted  that  induction  is  the  inverse 
operation  of  deduction,  but  the  difference  is  one  of  such 
great  importance  that  I  must  dwell  upon  it.  There  are 
many  cases  where  we  can  easily  and  infallibly  do  a  certain 
thing  but  may  have  much  trouble  in  undoing  it.  A  per 
son  may  walk  into  the  most  complicated  labyrinth  or  the 
most  extensive  catacombs,  and  turn  hither  and  thither  at 
his  will ;  it  is  when  he  wishes  to  return  that  doubt  and 


INDUCTION.  141 


difficulty  commence.  In  entering,  any  path  served  him  ; 
in  leaving,  he  must  select  certain  definite  paths,  and  in 
this  selection  he  must  either  trust  to  memory  of  the  way 
he  entered  or  else  make  an  exhaustive  trial  of  all  possible 
ways.  The  explorer  entering  a  new  country  makes  sure 
his  line  of  return  by  barking  the  trees. 

The  same  difficulty  arises  in  many  scientific  processes. 
Given  any  two  numbers,  we  may  by  a  simple  and  infallible 
process  obtain  their  product,  but  it  is  quite  another  matter 
when  a  large  number  is  given  to  determine  its  factors. 
Can  the  reader  say  what  two  numbers  multiplied  together 
will  produce  the  number  8,616,460,799  1  I  think  it 
unlikely  that  any  one  but  myself  will  ever  know ;  for 
they  are  two  large  prime  numbers,  and  can  only  be  re 
discovered  by  trying  in  succession  a  long  series  of  prime 
divisors  until  the  right  one  be  fallen  upon.  The  work 
would  probably  occupy  a  good  computer  for  many  weeks, 
but  it  did  not  occupy  me  many  minutes  to  multiply  the 
two  factors  together.  Similarly  there  is  no  direct  process 
for  discovering  whether  any  number  is  a  prime  or  not ; 
it  is  only  by  exhaustingly  trying  all  inferior  numbers 
which  could  be  divisors,  that  we  can  show  there  is  none, 
and  the  labour  of  the  process  would  be  intolerable  were  it 
not  performed  systematically  once  for  all  in  the  process 
known  as  the  Sieve  of  Eratosthenes,  the  results  being 
registered  in  tables  of  prime  numbers. 

The  immense  difficulties  which  are  encountered  in  the 
solution  of  algebraic  equations  are  another  illustration. 
Given  any  algebraic  factors,  we  can  easily  and  infallibly 
arrive  at  the  product,  but  given  a  product  it  is  a  matter 
of  infinite  difficulty  to  resolve  it  into  factors.  Given  any 
series  of  quantities  however  numerous,  there  is  very  little 
trouble  in  making  an  equation  which  shall  have  those 
quantities  as  roots.  Let  a,  1),  c,  d,  &c.,  be  the  quantities  ; 
then  (x  —  a)  (x  —  b)  (x  —  c)  (x  —  d) =  o 


142  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

is  the  equation  required,  and  we  only  need  to  multiply 
out  the  expression  on  the  left  hand  by  ordinary  rules. 
But  having  given  a  complex  algebraic  expression  equated 
to  zero,  it  is  a  matter  of  exceeding  difficulty  to  dis 
cover  all  the  roots.  Mathematicians  have  exhausted 
their  highest  powers  in  carrying  the  complete  solution 
up  to  the  fourth  degree.  In  every  other  mathematical 
operation  the  inverse  process  is  far  more  difficult  than 
the  direct  process,  subtraction  than  addition,  division 
than  multiplication,  evolution  than  involution  ;  but  the 
difficulty  increases  vastly  as  the  process  becomes  more 
complex.  The  differentiation,  the  direct  process,  is  always 
capable  of  performance  by  certain  fixed  rules,  but  as  these 
produce  considerable  variety  of  results,  the  inverse  process 
of  integration  presents  immense  difficulties,  and  in  an 
infinite  majority  of  cases  surpasses  the  present  resources 
of  mathematicians.  There  are  no  infallible  and  general 
rules  for  its  accomplishment ;  it  must  be  done  by  trial, 
by  guesswork,  by  remembering  the  results  of  differentia 
tion,  and  using  them  as  a  guide. 

Coming  more  nearly  to  our  own  immediate  subject, 
exactly  the  same  difficulty  exists  in  determining  the  law 
which  certain  numbers  obey.  Given  a  general  mathe 
matical  expression,  we  can  infallibly  ascertain  its  value 
for  any  required  value  of  the  variable.  But  I  am  not 
aware  that  mathematicians  have  ever  attempted  to  lay 
down  the  rules  of  a  process  by  which,  having  given  cer 
tain  numbers,  one  might  discover  a  rational  or  precise 
formula  from  which  they  proceed.  The  problem  is  always 
indeterminate,  because  an  infinite  number  of  formulae 
agreeing  with  certain  numbers,  might  always  be  dis 
covered  with  sufficient  trouble. 

The  reader  may  test  his  power  of  detecting  a  law,  by 
contemplation  of  its  results,  if  he,  not  being  a  mathema 
tician,  will  attempt  to  point  out  the  law  obeyed  by  the 


INDUCTION.  143 


following  numbers : 

11         ii          i      5      691      7     3617 

,      —  , ,      -        , ,      — —  j      ,         -,      — ,     CM.. 

20  30  42  30  66  2730  6  510 
These  numbers  are  sometimes  negative,  more  often  posi 
tive  ;  sometimes  in  low  terms,  but  unexpectedly  spring 
ing  up  to  high  terms  ;  in  absolute  magnitude  they 
are  very  variable.  They  seem  to  set  all  regularity  and 
method  at  defiance,  and  it  is  hardly  to  be  supposed  that 
any  one  could,  from  contemplation  of  the  numbers,  have 
detected  the  relation  between  them.  Yet  they  are  derived 
from  the  most  regular  and  symmetrical  laws  of  relation, 
and  are  of  the  highest  importance  in  mathematical  analysis, 
being  known  as  the  numbers  of  Bernouilli. 

Compare  again  the  difficulty  of  decyphering  with  that 
of  cyphering.  Any  one  can  invent  a  secret  language,  and 
with  a  little  steady  labour  can  translate  the  longest  letter 
into  the  character.  But  to  decypher  the  letter  having  no 
key  to  the  signs  adopted,  is  a  wholly  different  matter. 
As  the  possible  modes  of  secret  writing  are  infinite  in 
number  and  exceedingly  various  in  kind,  there  is  no  direct 
mode  of  discovery  whatever.  Repeated  trial,  guided 
more  or  less  by  knowledge  of  the  customary  form  of  cypher, 
and  resting  entirely  on  the  principles  of  probability,  is 
the  only  resource.  A  peculiar  tact  or  skill  is  requisite  for 
the  process,  and  a  few  men,  such  as  Wall  is  or  Mr.  Wheat- 
stone,  have  attained  great  success. 

Induction  is  the  decyphering  of  the  hidden  meaning  of 
natural  phenomena.  Given  events  which  happen  in  certain 
definite  combinations,  we  are  required  to  point  out  the 
laws  which  have  governed  those  combinations.  Any  laws 
being  supposed,  we  can,  with  ease  and  certainty,  decide 
whether  the  phenomena  obey  those  laws.  But  the  laws 
which  may  exist  are  infinite  in  variety,  so  that  the  chances 
are  immensely  against  mere  random  guessing.  The  dif 
ficulty  is  much  increased  by  the  fact  that  several  laws  will 


144  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

usually  be  in  operation  at  the  same  time,  the  effects  of 
which  are  complicated  together.  The  only  modes  of  dis 
covery  consist  either  in  exhaustively  trying  a  great  number 
of  supposed  laws,  a,  process  which  is  exhaustive  in  more 
senses  than  one,  or  else  by  carefully  contemplating  the 
effects,  endeavouring  to  remember  cases  in  which  like 
effects  followed  from  known  laws.  However  we  accom 
plish  the  discovery,  it  must  be  done  by  the  more  or  less 
apparent  application  of  the  direct  process  of  deduction. 

The  Logical  Abecedarium  illustrates  induction  as  well  as 
it  does  deduction.  In  the  Indirect  process  of  Inference  we 
found  that  from  certain  propositions  we  could  infaUibly 
determine  the  combinations  of  terms  agreeing  with  those 
premises.  The  inductive  problem  is  just  the  inverse. 
Having  given  certain  combinations  of  terms,  we  need  to 
ascertain  the  propositions  with  which  they  are  consistent, 
and  from  which  they  may  have  proceeded.  Now  if  the 
reader  contemplates  the  following  combinations 

ABC  abC 

aBC  abc, 

he  will  probably  remember  at  once  that  they  belong  to  the 
premises  A  =  AB,  B  =  BC.  If  not,  he  will  require  a  few 
trials  before  he  meets  with  the  right  answer,  and  every 
trial  will  consist  in  assuming  certain  laws  and  observing 
whether  the  deduced  results  agree  with  the  data.  To  test 
the  facility  with  which  he  can  solve  this  inductive  pro 
blem,  let  him  casually  strike  out  any  of  the  combinations, 
say  of  the  fourth  column  of  the  Abecedarium  (p.  109),  and 
say  what  laws  the  remaining  combinations  obey,  observing 
that  every  one  of  the  letter-terms  and  their  negatives 
ought  to  appear  in  order  to  avoid  self-contradiction  in  the 
premises  (pp.  88,  128).  Let  him  say,  for  instance,  what 
laws  are  embodied  in  the  combinations 
ABC  aBC 


INDUCTION.  .       145 


The  difficulty  becomes  much  greater  when  more  terms 
enter  into  the  combinations.  It  would  be  no  easy  matter 
to  point  out  the  complete  conditions  fulfilled  in  the  com 
binations 

ACe 

aECe 


abCe 
abcE. 

After  some  trouble  the  reader  may  discover  that  the 
principal  lawTs  are  C  =  e,  and  A  =  Ae  ;  but  he  would  hardly 
discover  the  remaining  law,  namely  that  BD  =  BDe. 

The  difficulties  encountered  in  the  inductive  investi 
gations  of  nature,  are  of  an  exactly  similar  kind. 

We  seldom  observe  any  great  law  in  uninterrupted  and 
undisguised  operation.  The  acuteness  of  Aristotle  and 
the  ancient  Greeks,  did  not  enable  them  to  detect  that  all 
terrestrial  bodies  tend  to  fall  towards  the  centre  of  the 
earth.  A  very  few  nights  of  observation  would  have  con 
vinced  an  astronomer  viewing  the  solar  system  from  its 
centre,  that  the  planets  travelled  round  the  sun  ;  but  the 
fact  that  our  place  of  observation  is  one  of  the  travelling 
planets,  so  complicates  the  apparent  motions  of  the  other 
bodies,  that  it  required  all  the  industry  and  sagacity  of 
Copernicus  to  prove  the  real  simplicity  of  the  planetary 
system.  It  is  the  same  throughout  nature  ;  the  laws  may 
be  simple,  but  their  combined  effects  are  not  simple,  and 
we  have  no  clue  to  guide  us  through  their  intricacies.  '  It 
is  the  glory  of  God/  said  Solomon,  '  to  conceal  a  thing,  but 
the  glory  of  a  king  to  search  it  out.'  The  laws  of  nature 
are  the  invaluable  secrets  which  God  has  hidden,  and  it  is 
the  kingly  prerogative  of  the  philosopher  to  search  them 
out  by  industry  and  sagacity. 


146  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

Induction  of  Simple  Identities. 

Many  of  the  most  important  laws  of  nature  are  ex 
pressible  in  the  form  of  simple  identities,  and  I  can  at  once 
adduce  them  as  examples  to  illustrate  what  I  have  said 
of  the  difficulty  of  the  inverse  process  of  induction.  There 
are  many  cases  in  which  two  phenomena  are  usually  con 
joined.  Thus  all  gravitating  matter  is  exactly  coincident 
with  all  matter  possessing  inertia  ;  where  one  property 
appears,  the  other  likewise  appears.  All  crystals  of  the 
cubical  system,  are  all  the  crystals  which  do  not  doubly 
refract  light.  All  exogenous  plants  are,  with  some  ex 
ceptions,  those  which  have  two  cotyledons  or  seed-leaves. 

A  little  reflection  will  show  that  there  is  no  direct  and 
infallible  process  by  which  such  complete  coincidences  may 
be  discovered.  Natural  objects  are  aggregates  of  many 
qualities,  and  any  one  of  those  qualities  may  prove  to  be 
in  close  connection  with  some  others.  If  each  of  a 
numerous  group  of  objects  is  endowed  with  a  hundred 
distinct  physical  or  chemical  qualities,  there  will  be  no 
less  than  J  (100x99)  or  4950  pairs  of  qualities,  which 
may  be  connected,  and  it  will  evidently  be  a  matter  of 
great  intricacy  and  labour  to  ascertain  exactly  which 
qualities  are  connected  by  any  simple  law. 

One  principal  source  of  difficulty  is  that  the  finite  powers 
of  the  human  mind  are  not  sufficient  to  compare  by  a 
single  act  any  large  group  of  objects  with  another  large 
group.  We  cannot  hold  in  the  conscious  possession  of  the 
mind  at  any  one  moment  more  than  five  or  six  different 
ideas.  Hence  we  must  treat  any  more  complex  group  by 
successive  acts  of  attention.  The  reader  will  perceive  by 
an  almost  individual  act  of  comparison  that  the  words 
Roma  and  Mora  contain  the  same  letters.  He  may 
perhaps  see  at  a  glance  whether  the  same  is  true  of 
Caused  and  Casual,  and  of  Logica  and  Caligo.  To  assure 


INDUCTION.  147 


himself  that  the  letters  in  Astronomers  make  No  more 
stars,  that  Serpens  in  cikuleo  is  an  anagram  of  Joannes 
Keplerus,  or  Great  gun  do  us  a  sum  an  anagram  of  Au 
gustus  de  Morgan,  it  will  certainly  be  necessary  to  break 
up  the  act  of  comparison  into  several  successive  acts.  The 
process  will  acquire  a  double  character,  and  will  consist  in 
ascertaining  that  each  letter  of  the  first  group  is  among 
the  letters  of  the  second  group,  and  vice  versd,  that  each 
letter  of  the  second  is  among  those  of  the  first  group. 
In  the  same  way  we  can  only  prove  that  two  long  lists  of 
names  are  identical,  by  showing  that  each  name  in  one 
list  occurs  in  the  other,  and  vice  versd. 

This  process  of  comparison  really  consists  in  establish 
ing  two  partial  identities,  which  are,  as  already  shown 
(P-  T33)»  equivalent  in  conjunction  to  one  simple  iden 
tity.  We  first  ascertain  the  truth  of  the  two  propositions 
A  =  AB,  B  =  AB,  and  we  then  rise  by  substitution  to  the 
single  law  A  =  B. 

There  is  another  process,  it  is  true,  by  which  we  may 
get  to  exactly  the  same  result,  for  the  two  propositions 
A  =  AB,  a  =  ab  are  also  equivalent  to  the  simple  identity 
A  =  B  (p.  133).  If  then  we  can  show  that  all  objects 
included  under  A  are  included  under  B,  and  also  that  all 
objects  not  included  under  A  are  not  included  under  B, 
our  purpose  is  effected.  By  this  process  we  should 
usually  compare  two  lists  if  we  are  allowed  to  mark  them. 
For  each  name  in  the  first  list  we  should  strike  off  one  in 
the  second,  and  if,  when  the  first  list  is  exhausted  the 
second  list  is  also  exhausted,  it  follows  that  all  names 
absent  from  the  first  must  be  absent  from  the  second, 
and  the  coincidence  must  be  complete. 

The  two  modes  of  proving  a  simple  identity  are  so 
closely  allied  that  it  is  doubtful  how  far  we  can  detect 
any  difference  in  their  powers  and  instances  of  application. 
The  first  method  is  perhaps  more  convenient  where  the 

L  2 


148  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

phenomena  to  be  compared  are  rare.  Tims  we  prove 
that  all  the  musical  concords  coincide  with  all  the  more 
simple  numerical  ratios,  by  showing  that  each  concord 
arises  from  a  simple  ratio  of  undulations,  and  then  show 
ing  that  each  simple  ratio  gives  rise  to  one  of  the  con 
cords.  To  examine  all  the  possible  cases  of  discord  or 
complex  ratio  of  undulation  would  be  impossible.  By  a 
happy  stroke  of  induction  Sir  John  Herschel  discovered 
that  all  crystals  of  quartz  which  rotate  the  plane  of  polar 
ization  of  light  are  precisely  those  crystals  which  have 
plagihedral  faces,  that  is,  oblique  faces  on  the  corners 
of  the  prism  unsymmetrical  with  the  ordinary  faces. 
This  singular  relation  would  be  proved  by  observing  that 
all  plagihedral  crystals  possessed  the  power  of  rotation, 
and  vice  versd  all  crystals  possessing  this  power  were 
plagihedral.  But  it  might  at  the  same  time  be  noticed 
that  all  ordinary  crystals  were  devoid  of  the  power. 
There  is  no  reason  why  we  should  not  observe  any  of  the 
four  propositions  A  =  AB,  B  =  AB,  a  =  ab,  b  =  ab,  all  of 
which  follow  from  A  =  B  (see  p.  133). 

Sometimes  the  terms  of  the  identity  may  be  singular 
objects  ;  thus  we  observe  that  diamond  is  a  combustible 
gem,  and  being  unable  to  discover  any  other  that  is,  we 
affirm 

Diamond  =  combustible  gem, 
In  a  similar  manner  we  ascertain  that 

Mercury  =  metal  liquid  at  ordinary  temperatures, 

Substance  of  least  density  =  substance  of  least  atomic 

weight. 

Two  or  three  objects  may  occasionally  enter  into  the 
induction,  as  when  we  learn  that 

Sodium  I  potassium  —  metal    of   less    density   than 
water, 

Venus  I  Mercury  |  Mars  =  major   planet   devoid  of 
satellites. 


INDUCTION.  H9 


Induction  of  Partial  Identities. 

We  found  in  the  last  section  that  the  simple  identity  of 
two  classes  is  almost  always  discovered  not  by  direct 
observation  of  the  fact,  but  by  first  establishing  two 
partial  identities.  There  are  also  a  great  multitude  of 
cases  in  which  the  partial  identity  of  one  class  with  an 
other  is  the  only  relation  to  be  discovered.  Thus  the  most 
common  of  all  inductive  inferences  consists  in  establishing 
the  fact  that  all  objects  having  the  properties  of  A  have 
also  those  of  B,  or  that  A  =  AB.  To  ascertain  the  truth 
of  a  proposition  of  this  kind  it  is  merely  necessary  to 
assemble  together,  mentally  or  physically,  all  the  objects 
included  under  A,  and  then  observe  whether  B  is  present 
in  each  of  them,  or,  which  is  the  same,  whether  it  would 
be  impossible  to  select  from  among  them  any  not-B. 
Thus,  if  we  mentally  assemble  together  all  the  heavenly 
bodies  which  move  with  apparent  rapidity,  that  is  to  say 
the  planets,  we  find  that  they  all  possess  the  property  of 
not  scintillating.  We  cannot  analyse  any  vegetable  sub 
stance  without  discovering  that  it  contains  carbon  and 
hydrogen,  but  it  is  not  true  that  all  substances  containing 
carbon  and  hydrogen  are  vegetable  substances. 

The  great  mass  of  scientific  truths  consists  of  propo 
sitions  of  this  form  A  — AB.  Thus  in  astronomy  we 
learn  that  all  the  planets  are  spheroidal  bodies ;  that 
they  all  revolve  in  one  direction  round  the  sun ;  that 
they  aU  shine  by  reflected  light ;  that  they  all  obey 
the  law  of  gravitation.  But  of  course  it  is  not  to  be 
asserted  that  all  bodies  obeying  the  law  of  gravitation, 
or  shining  by  reflected  light,  or  revolving  in  a  particular 
direction,  or  being  spheroidal  in  form,  are  planets.  In 
other  sciences  we  have  immense  numbers  of  propositions 
of  the  same  form,  as  for  instance  that  all  substances  in 


150  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 


becoming  gaseous  absorb  heat ;  that  all  metals  are 
elements ;  that  they  are  all  good  conductors  of  heat  and 
electricity ;  that  all  the  alkaline  metals  are  monad 
elements  ;  that  all  foraminifera  are  marine  organisms  ; 
that  all  parasitic  animals  are  non- mammalian ;  that 
lightning  never  issues  from  stratous  clouds  a ;  that  pumice 
never  occurs  where  only  Labrador  felspar  is  present b  : 
and  scientific  importance  may  attach  even  to  such  ap 
parently  trifling  observations  as  that  '  white  cats  having 
blue  eyes  are  deaf  c.' 

The  process  of  inference  by  which  all  such  truths  are 
obtained  may  readily  be  exhibited  in  a  precise  symbolic 
form.  We  must  have  one  premise  specifying  in  a  dis 
junctive  form  all  the  possible  individuals  which  belong 
to  a  class  ;  we  resolve  the  class,  in  short,  into  its  con 
stituents.  We  then  need  a  number  of  propositions  each 
of  which  affirms  that  one  of  the  individuals  possesses  a 
certain  property.  Thus  the  premises  must  be  of  the 
form 

A  =  B!  01  D|. .:...!  PI  Q 

B-  BX 

C  =  CX 


Q  =  QX. 

Now  if  we  substitute  for  each  alternative  of  the  first 
premise  its  description  as  found  among  the  succeeding 
premises  we  obtain 

A  =  BXI  CXI  .........  IPXIQX 

or 

A  =  (B!C| 


a  Arago's  Meteorological  Essays,  p.  10. 

b  Lyell's  Elements  of  Geology,  Fourth  ed.  p.  373. 

c  Darwin's  Variation  of  Animals,  &c. 


INDUCTION.  151 


But  for  the  aggregate  of  alternatives  we  may  now 
substitute  their  equivalent  as  given  in  the  first  premise, 
namely  A,  so  that  we  get  the  required  result 

A  =  AX. 

It  may  be  remarked  that  we  should  have  reached  the 
same  final  result  if  our  original  premise  had  been  of  the 
form 

A  =  ABI  AC-I- IAQ. 

The  difference  of  meaning  is  that  all  B's  need  not  now 
be  A's,  nor  all  C's,  &c.     But  we  should  still  have 
A  =  ABX  I  ACX  I  I  AQX  =  AX. 

We  can  always  prove  a  proposition,  if  we  find  it  more 
convenient,  by  proving  its  equivalent.  To  assert  that  all 
not-B's  are  not- A's,  is  exactly  the  same  as  to  assert  that  all 
A's  are  B's.  Accordingly  we  may  ascertain  that  A  =  AB 
by  first  ascertaining  that  b  =  ab.  If  we  observe,  for  in 
stance,  that  all  substances  which  are  not  solids  are  also 
not  capable  of  double  refraction,  it  follows  necessarily 
that  all  double  refracting  substances  are  solids.  We  may 
convince  ourselves  that  all  electric  substances  are  noncon 
ductors  of  electricity,  by  reflecting  that  all  good  conduc 
tors  do  not,  and  in  fact  cannot,  retain  electric  excitation. 
When  we  come  to  questions  of  probability  it  will  be  found 
desirable  to  prove,  as  far  as  possible,  both  the  original 
proposition  and  its  equivalent,  as  there  is  then  an  increased 
area  of  observation. 

The  number  of  alternatives  which  may  arise  in  the 
division  of  a  class  varies  greatly,  and  may  be  any  number 
from  two  upwards.  Thus  it  is  probable  that  every  sub 
stance  is  either  magnetic  or  diamagnetic,  and  no  substance 
can  be  both  at  the  same  time.  The  division  then  must  be 
made  in  the  form 

A  =  ABcl-A&C. 

If  now  we  can  prove  that  all  magnetic  substances 
are  capable  of  polarity,  say  B  =  BC,  and  also  that  all 


152  TEE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

diamagnetic  substances  are  capable  of  polarity  C  =  CD,  it 
follows  by  substitution  that  all  substances  are  capable  of 
polarity,  or  A  =  AD.  We  may  divide  the  class  substance 
again  into  the  three  subclasses,  solid,  liquid,  and  gas; 
and  if  we  can  show  that  in  each  of  these  forms  it  obeys 
Carnot's  thermodynamic  law,  it  follows  that  all  substances 
obey  that  law.  Similarly  we  may  show  that  all  verte 
brate  animals  possess  red  blood,  if  we  can  show  separately 
that  fish,  reptiles,  birds,  marsupials,  and  mammals  possess 
red  blood,  there  being,  as  far  as  is  known,  only  five 
principal  subclasses  of  vertebrata. 

Our  inductions  will  often  be  embarrassed  by  exceptions, 
real  or  apparent.  We  might  affirm  that  all  gems  are 
incombustible  were  not  diamond  undoubtedly  combustible. 
Nothing  seems  more  evident  than  that  all  the  metals  are 
opaque  until  we  examine  them  in  fine  films,  when  gold 
and  silver  are  found  to  be  transparent.  All  plants  absorb 
carbonic  acid  except  certain  fungi ;  all  the  bodies  of  the 
planetary  system  have  a  progressive  motion  from  west  to 
east,  except  the  satellites  of  Uranus  and  Neptune.  Even 
some  of  the  profoundest  laws  of  matter  are  not  quite 
universal ;  all  solids  expand  by  heat  except  india-rubber, 
and  possibly  a  few  other  substances  ;  all  liquids  which 
have  been  tested  expand  by  heat  except  water  below  4°C 
and  fused  bismuth  ;  all  gases  have  a  coefficient  of  expan 
sion  increasing  with  the  temperature  except  hydrogen. 
In  a  later  chapter  I  shall  consider  how  such  anomalous 
cases  may  be  regarded  and  classified ;  here  we  have  only 
to  express  them  in  a  consistent  manner  in  our  nota 
tion. 

Let  us  take  the  case  of  the  transparency  of  metals,  and 
assign  the  terms  thus 

A  =  metal  D  =  iron 

B  =  gold  E,  F  &c.  =  copper,  lead,  &c. 

C  =  silver  X  =  opaque. 


INDUCTION.  153 


Our  premises  will  be 

A  =  BIG!  DIE,  &c. 

B  =  Baj 

C  =  Cx 

D  =  DX 

E  =  EX, 
and  so  on  for  the  rest  of  the  metals.     Now  evidently 

Kbc  =  (D-I-EIFI )lc, 

ar.d  by  substitution  as  before  we  shall  obtain 

Abe  =  A&cX, 

or  in  words,  '  All  metals  not  gold  nor  silver  are  opaque  ; ' 
at  the  same  time  we  have 

A(BI  C)  =  ABI  AC  -  ABaH-  ACa  =  A(BI  C)x, 
or  '  Metals  which  are  either  gold  or  silver  are  not  opaque.' 
In  some  cases  the  problem  of  induction  assumes  a  much 
higher  degee  of  complexity.  If  we  examine  the  properties 
of  crystallized  substances  we  may  find  some  properties 
which  are  common  to  all,  as  cleavage  or  fracture  in  definite 
planes ;  but  it  would  soon  become  requisite  to  break  up 
the  class  into  several  minor  ones.  We  should  divide 
crystals  according  to  the  seven  accepted  systems — and 
we  should  then  find  that  crystals  of  each  system  possess 
many  common  properties.  Thus  crystals  of  the  Eegular 
or  Cubical  system  expand  equally  by  heat,  conduct  heat 
and  electricity  with  uniform  rapidity,  and  are  of  like 
elasticity  in  all  directions ;  they  have  but  one  index  of 
refraction  for  light ;  and  every  facet  is  repeated  in  like 
relation  to  each  of  the  three  axes.  Crystals  of  the  system 
which  possess  one  principal  axis  will  be  found  to  possess 
the  various  physical  powers  of  conduction,  refraction, 
elasticity,  &c.,  uniformly  in  directions  perpendicular  to 
the  principal  axis,  but  in  other  directions  their  properties 
vary  according  to  complicated  laws.  The  remaining  systems 
in  which  the  crystals  possess  three  unequal  axes,  or  have 
inclined  axes,  exhibit  still  more  complicated  results,  the 


154  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

effects  of  the  crystal  upon  light,  heat,  electricity,  &c., 
varying  in  all  directions.  But  when  we  pursue  induction 
into  the  intricacies  of  its  application  to  Nature  we  really 
enter  upon  the  subject  of  classification  which  we  must 
take  up  again  in  a  later  part  of  this  work. 

Complete  Solution  of  the  Inverse  or  Inductive  Logical 

Problem. 

It  is  now  plain  that  Induction  consists  in  passing  back 
from  a  series  of  combinations  to  the  laws  by  which  such 
combinations  are  governed.  The  natural  law  that  all 
metals  are  conductors  of  electricity  really  means  that  in 
nature  we  find  three  classes  of  objects,  namely — 

1 .  Metals,  conductors  ; 

2.  Not-metals,  conductors ; 

3.  Not-metals,  not-conductors. 

It  comes  to  the  same  thing  if  we  say  that  it  excludes  the 
existence  of  the  class,  'metals  not-conductors.'  In  the 
same  way  every  other  law  or  group  of  laws  will  really 
mean  the  exclusion  from  existence  of  certain  combinations 
of  the  things,  circumstances  or  phenomena  governed  by 
those  laws.  Now  in  logic  we  treat  not  the  phenomena 
and  laws  but,  strictly  speaking,  the  general  forms  of  the 
laws  ;  and  a  little  consideration  will  show  that  for  a  finite 
number  of  things  the  possible  number  of  forms  or  kinds 
of  law  governing  them  must  also  be  finite.  Using  general 
terms  we  know  that  A  and  B  can  be  present  or  absent  in 
four  ways  and  no  more — thus 

AB,  Aft,  aB,  ab  • 

therefore  every  possible  law  which  can  exist  concerning 
the  relation  of  A  and  B  must  be  marked  by  the  exclusion 
of  one  or  more  of  the  above  combinations.  The  number 
of  possible  laws  then  cannot  exceed  the  number  of  selec 
tions  which  we  can  make  from  these  four  combinations, 


INDUCTION. 


155 


and  we  arrive  at  this  utmost  number  of  cases  by  omitting 
any  one  or  more  of  the  four.  The  number  of  cases  to 
be  considered  is  therefore  2x2x2x2  or  sixteen,  since 
each  may  be  present  or  absent ;  and  these  cases  are  all 
shown  in  the  following  table,  in  which  the  sign  o  indicates 
absence  or  non-existence  of  the  combination  shown  at  the 
left-hand  column  in  the  same  line,  and  the  mark  i  its 
presence  :— 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

* 

8 

* 

9 

V 

11 

12 

* 

13 

14 

* 

15 

* 

16 

AB 

o 

o 

o 

0 

o 

o  - 

0 

o 

I 

i 

I 

i 

i 

i 

i 

i 

A6 

o 

0 

o 

0 

I 

I 

I 

I 

o 

o 

o 

o 

i 

i 

i 

i 

aB 

o 

o 

I 

I 

o 

o 

I 

I 

o 

o 

I 

I 

o 

o 

i 

i 

ab 

0 

I 

0 

I 

o 

I 

o 

I 

0 

I 

o 

I 

0 

I 

o 

i 

Thus  in  column  sixteen  we  find  that  all  the  conceivable 
combinations  are  present,  which  means  that  there  are  no 
special  laws  in  existence  in  such  a  case,  and  that  the 
combinations  are  governed  only  by  the  universal  Laws  of 
Identity  and  Difference.  The  example  of  metals  and 
conductors  of  electricity  would  be  represented  by  the 
twelfth  column ;  and  every  other  mode  in  which  two 
things  or  qualities  might  present  themselves  is  shown  in 
one  or  other  of  the  columns.  More  than  half  the  cases 
may  indeed  be  at  once  rejected,  because  they  involve  the 
entire  absence  of  a  term  or  its  negative.  It  has  been 
shown  to  be  a  necessary  logical  principle  that  every  term 
must  have  its  negative  (p.  88),  and  where  this  is  not  the 
case  some  inconsistency  between  the  laws  or  conditions  of 
combinations  must  exist.  Thus  if  we  laid  down  the  two 
following  propositions,  *  Graphite  conducts  electricity,' 
and  '  Graphite  does  not  conduct  electricity/  it  would 
amount  to  asserting  the  impossibility  of  graphite  existing 
at  all ;  or  in  general  terms,  A  is  B  and  A  is  not  B  result 
in  destroying  altogether  the  combinations  containing  A. 


156  THE   PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

We  therefore  restrict  our  attention  to  those  cases  which 
may  be  represented  in  natural  phenomena  where  at  least 
two  combinations  are  present,  and  which  correspond  to 
those  columns  of  the  table  in  which  each  of  A,  a,  B,  b 
appears.  These  cases  are  shown  in  the  columns  marked 
with  an  asterisk. 

We  find  that  seven  cases  remain  for  examination,  thus 
characterised— 

Four  cases  exhibiting  three  combinations, 
Two  cases  exhibiting  two  combinations, 
One  case  exhibiting  four  combinations. 
It  has  already  been  pointed  out  that  a  proposition  of  the 
form  A  =  AB  destroys  one  combination  A6,  so  that  this 
is  the  form  of  law  applying  to  the   twelfth  case.     But 
by  changing  one  or  more  of  the  terms  in  A  =  AB  into 
its  negative,  or  by  interchanging  A  and  B,  a  and  b,  we 
obtain  no  less  than  eight  different  varieties  of  the  one  form ; 
thus— 

1 2th  case.     8th  case.      i^tb  case.     i4th  case. 

A  =  AB         A  —  A.b          «  =  «B  a  =  ab 

b  =  ab          B  =  aB          b  =  A.b          B  =  AB. 

But  the  reader  of  the  preceding  sections  will  at  once 
see  that  each  proposition  in  the  lower  line  is  logically  equi 
valent  to,  and  is  in  fact  the  contrapositive  of,  that  above 
it  (p.  98).  Thus  the  propositions  A  =  A&  and  B  =  aB 
both  give  the  same  combinations,  shown  in  the  eighth 
column  of  the  table,  and  trial  shows  that  the  twelfth, 
eighth,  fifteenth  and  fourteenth  cases  are  thus  fully  ac 
counted  for.  We  come  to  this  conclusion  then — The 
general  form  of  proposition  A  =  AB  admits  of  four 
logically  distinct  varieties,  each  capable  of  expression  in 
two  different  modes. 

In  two  columns  of  the  table,  namely  the  seventh  and 
tenth,  we  observe  that  two  combinations  are  missing.  Now 
a  simple  identity  A  =  B  renders  impossible  both  Kb  and  «B, 


INDUCTION.  157 


accounting  for  the  tenth  case  ;  and  if  we  change  B  into  b 
the  identity  A  =  b  accounts  for  the  seventh  case.  There 
may  indeed  be  two  other  varieties  of  the  simple  identity, 
namely  a  =  b  and  a  =  B  ;  but  it  has  already  been  shown 
repeatedly  that  these  are  equivalent  respectively  to  A  =  B 
and  A.~b  (pp.  133,  134).  As  the  sixteenth  column  has 
already  been  accounted  for  as  governed  by  no  special 
conditions,  we  come  to  the  following  general  conclusion  : — • 
The  laws  governing  the  combinations  of  two  terms  must 
be  capable  of  expression  either  in  a  partial  identity 
(A  — AB),  or  a  simple  identity  (A  =  B)  ;  the  partial 
identity  is  capable  of  only  four  logically  distinct  varieties, 
and  the  simple  identity  of  two.  Every  logical  relation 
between  two  terms  must  be  expressed  in  one  of  these 
six  laws,  or  must  be  logically  equivalent  to  one  of  them. 

In  short,  we  may  conclude  that  in  treating  of  partial 
and  complete  identity,  we  have  exhaustively  treated  the 
modes  in  which  two  terms  or  classes  of  objects  can  be 
related.  Of  any  two  classes  it  may  be  said  that  one  must 
either  be  included  in  the  other,  or  must  be  identical  with 
it,  or  some  similar  relation  must  exist  between  one  class 
and  the  negative  of  the  other.  We  have  thus  completely 
solved  the  inverse  logical  problem  concerning  two  terms d. 

The  Inverse  Logical  Problem  involving  Three  Terms. 

No  sooner  do  we  introduce  into  the  problem  a  third 
term  C,  than  the  investigation  assumes  a  far  more  com 
plex  character,  so  that  some  readers  may  prefer  to  pass 
over  this  section.  Three  terms  and  their  negatives  may  be 
combined,  as  we  have  frequently  seen,  in  eight  different 

d  The  contents  of  this  and  the  following  section  nearly  correspond 
with  those  of  a  paper  read  before  the  Manchester  Literary  and  Philosophical 
Society  on  December  26th,  1871.  See  Proceedings  of  the  Society,  vol.  xi. 
pp.  65-68,  and  Memoirs,  Third  Series,  vol.  v.  pp.  119-130. 


158  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

combinations,  and  the  effect  of  laws  or  logical  conditions 
is  to  destroy  any  one  or  more  of  these  combinations. 
Now  we  may  make  selections  from  eight  things  in  28  or 
256  ways  ;  so  that  we  have  no  less  than  256  different  cases 
to  treat,  and  the  complete  solution  is  at  least  fifty  times 
as  troublesome  as  with  two  terms.  Many  series  of  com 
binations,  indeed,  are  contradictory,  as  in  the  simpler 
problem,  and  may  be  passed  over.  The  test  of  consistency 
is  that  each  of  the  letters  A,  B,  C,  a,  b,  c  shall  appear 
somewhere  in  the  series  of  combinations ;  but  I  have 
not  been  able  to  discover  any  mode  of  calculating  the 
number  of  cases  in  which  inconsistency  would  happen. 
The  logical  complexity  of  the  problem  is  so  great  that 
the  ordinary  modes  of  calculating  numbers  of  combinations 
in  mathematical  science  fail  to  give  any  aid,  and  ex 
haustive  examination  of  the  combinations  in  detail  is 
the  only  method  applicable. 

My  mode  of  solving  the  problem  was  as  follows  : — 
Having  written  out  the  whole  of  the  256  series  of  com 
binations,  I  examined  them  separately  and  struck  out 
such  as  did  not  fulfil  the  test  of  consistency.  I  then  chose 
some  common  form  of  proposition  involving  two  or  three 
terms,  and  varied  it  in  every  possible  manner,  both  by 
the  circular  interchange  of  letters  (A,  B,  C  into  B,  C,  A 
and  then  C,  A,  B),  and  by  the  substitution  for  any  one  or 
more  of  the  terms  of  the  corresponding  negative  terms. 
For  instance,  the  proposition  AB  =  ABC  can  be  first  varied 
by  circular  interchange,  so  as  to  give  BC  =  BCA  and  then 
C  A  =  CAB.  Each  of  these  three  can  then  be  thrown 
into  eight  varieties  by  negative  change.  Thus  AB  =  ABC 
gives  aB  =  aBC,  Afr  =  A6C,  AB  =  ABc,  db  =  abC,  and  so  on. 
Thus  there  may  possibly  exist  no  less  than  twenty-four 
varieties  of  the  law  having  the  general  form  AB  =  ABC, 
meaning  that  whatever  has  the  properties  of  A  and  B  has 
those  also  of  C.  It  by  no  means  follows  that  some  of  the 


INDUCTION.  159 


varieties  may  not  be  equivalent  to  others ;  and  trial 
shows,  in  fact,  that  AB  =  ABC  is  exactly  the  same  in 
meaning  as  Ac  =  A5c  or  Be  =  Bca.  Thus  the  law  in 
question  has  but  eight  varieties  of  distinct  logical  mean 
ing.  I  now  ascertain  by  actual  deductive  reasoning  which 
of  the  256  series  of  combinations  result  from  each  of 
these  distinct  laws,  and  mark  them  off  as  soon  as  found. 
I  now  proceed  to  some  other  form  of  law,  for  instance 
A  =  ABC,  meaning  that  whatever  has  the  qualities  of  A  has 
those  also  of  B  and  C.  I  find  that  it  admits  of  twenty- 
four  variations,  all  of  which  are  found  to  be  logically 
distinct ;  the  combinations  being  worked  out,  I  am  able 
to  mark  off  twenty-four  more  of  the  list  of  256  series.  I 
proceed  in  this  way  to  work  out  the  results  of  every  form  of 
law  which  I  can  find  or  invent.  If  in  the  course  of  this 
work  I  obtain  any  series  of  combinations  which  had  been 
previously  marked  off,  I  learn  at  once  that  the  law  is 
logically  equivalent  to  some  law  previously  treated.  It 
may  be  safely  inferred  that  every  variety  of  the  ap 
parently  new  law  will  coincide  in  meaning  with  some 
variety  of  the  former  expression  of  the  same  law.  I 
have  sufficiently  verified  this  assumption  in  some  cases 
and  have  never  found  it  lead  to  error.  Thus  just  as 
AB  =  ABC  is  equivalent  to  Ac  =  A6c,  so  we  find  that 
ab  =  ab(j  is  equivalent  to  ac  =  acB. 

Among  the  laws  treated  were  the  two  A  =  AB  and 
A  =  B  which  involve  only  two  terms,  because  it  may  of 
course  happen  that  among  three  things  two  only  are 
in  special  logical  relation,  and  the  third  independent ;  and 
the  series  of  combinations  representing  such  cases  of 
relation  are  sure  to  occur  in  the  complete  enumeration. 
All  single  propositions  which  I  could  invent  having  been 
treated,  pairs  of  propositions  were  next  investigated. 
Thus  we  have  the  relations,  'All  A's  are  B's  and  all 
B's  are  C's,'  of  which  the  old  logical  syllogism  is  the 


160  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

development.  We  may  also  have  '  all  A's  are  all  B's, 
and  all  B's  are  C's,'  or  even  '  all  A's  are  all  B's,  and  all 
B's  are  all  C's.'  All  such  premises  admit  of  variations, 
greater  or  less  in  number,  the  logical  distinctness  of  which 
can  only  be  determined  by  trial  in  detail.  Disjunctive 
propositions  either  singly  or  in  pairs  were  also  treated, 
but  were  often  found  to  be  equivalent  to  other  propo 
sitions  of  a  simpler  form  ;  thus  A  —  ABC  I  Kbc  is  exactly 
the  same  in  meaning  as  AB  =  AC. 

This  mode  of  exhaustive  trial  bears  some  analogy  to 
that  ancient  mathematical  process  called  the  Sieve  of 
Eratosthenes.  Having  taken  a  long  series  of  the  natural 
numbers,  Eratosthenes  is  said  to  have  calculated  out  in 
succession  all  the  multiples  of  every  number,  and  to  have 
marked  them  off,  so  that  at  last  the  prime  numbers  alone 
remained,  and  the  factors  of  every  number  were  exhaus 
tively  discovered.  My  problem  of  2  56  series  of  combinations 
is  the  logical  analogue,  the  chief  points  of  difference  being 
that  there  is  a  limit  to  the  number  of  cases,  and  that  prime 
numbers  have  no  analogue  in  logic,  since  every  series  of 
combinations  corresponds  to  a  law  or  group  of  conditions. 
But  the  analogy  is  perfect  in  the  point  that  they  are 
both  inverse  processes.  There  is  no  mode  of  ascertaining 
that  a  number  is  prime  but  by  showing  that  it  is  not 
the  product  of  any  assignable  factors.  So  there  is  no 
mode  of  ascertaining  what  laws  are  embodied  in  any 
series  of  combinations  but  trying  exhaustively  the  laws 
which  would  give  them.  Just  as  the  results  of  Erato 
sthenes'  method  have  been  worked  out  to  a  great  extent 
and  registered  in  tables  for  the  convenience  of  other 
mathematicians,  I  have  endeavoured  to  work  out  the 
inverse  logical  problem  to  the  utmost  extent  which  is 
at  present  practicable  or  useful. 

I  have   thus   found   that  there  are  altogether   fifteen 
conditions    or    series    of  conditions   which    may   govern 


IND  UCTION. 


161 


the  combinations  of  three  terms,  forming  the  premises 
of  fifteen  essentially  different  kinds  of  arguments.  The 
following  table  contains  a  statement  of  these  conditions, 
together  with  the  number  of  combinations  which  are 
contradicted  or  destroyed  by  each,  and  the  number  of 
logically  distinct  variations  of  which  the  law  is  capable. 
There  might  be  also  added,  as  a  sixteenth  case,  that  case 
where  no  special  logical  condition  exists,  so  that  all  the 
eight  combinations  remain. 


Reference 
Number. 

Propositions  expressing  the  general 
type  of  the  logical  conditions. 

Number  of  dis 
tinct  logical 
variations. 

Number  of 
combinations 
contradicted 
by  each. 

I. 

A  =  B 

6 

4 

II. 

A  =  AB 

12 

2 

III. 

A  =  B,  B  =  C 

4 

6 

IV. 

A  =  B,  B  =  BC 

24 

5 

V. 

A  =  AB,  B  =  BC 

24 

4 

VI. 

A  =  BC 

24 

4 

VII. 

A  =  ABC 

24 

3 

VIII. 

AB=ABC 

8 

i 

IX. 

A  =  AB,  «B  =  aBc 

24 

3 

X, 

A  =  ABC,  ab  =  a&C 

8 

4 

XI. 

AB  =  ABC,  ab  =  abc 

4 

2 

XII. 

AB  =  AC 

12 

2 

XIII. 

A  =  BC-i-A6c 

8 

3 

XIV. 

A  =  BC-|-6c 

2 

4 

XV. 

A  =  ABC,  a  =  Bc-|-b<7 

8 

5 

192 

There  are  sixty-three  series  of  combinations  derived  from 
self-contradictory  premises,  which  with  the  above  192  series 
and  the  one  case  where  there  are  no  conditions  or  laws  at 
all,  make  up  the  whole  conceivable  number  of  256  series. 

We  learn  from  this  table,  for  instance,  that  two  pro 
positions  of  the  form  A  =  AB,  B-BC,  which  are  such 
as  constitute  the  premises  of  the  old  syllogism  Barbara, 
negative  or  render  impossible  four  of  the  eight  combi 
nations  in  which  three  terms  may  be  united,  and  that 
these  propositions  are  capable  of  taking  twenty-four  vari 
ations  by  transpositions  of  the  terms  or  the  introduction 

M 


162  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

of  negatives.  This  table  then  presents  the  results  of 
a  complete  analysis  of  all  the  possible  logical  relations 
arising  in  the  case  of  three  terms,  and  the  old  syllogism 
forms  but  one  out  of  fifteen  typical  forms.  Generally 
speaking  every  form  can  be  converted  into  apparently 
different  propositions  ;  thus  the  fourth  type  A  =  B,  B  =  BO 
may  appear  in  the  form  A  =  ABC,  a  =  ab,  or  again  in  the 
form  of  three  propositions  A  =  AB,  B  =  BC,  aB  =  aBc  ;  but 
all  these  sets  of  premises  yield  identically  the  same  series 
of  combinations,  and  are  therefore  of  exactly  equivalent 
logical  meaning.  The  fifth  type,  or  Barbara,  can  also  be 
thrown  into  the  equivalent  forms  A  =  ABC,  aB  =  aBC  and 
A  =  AC,  B  =  A  I  aBC.  In  other  cases  I  have  obtained  the 
very  same  logical  conditions  in  four  modes  of  statement 
As  regards  mere  appearance  and  mode  of  statement,  the 
number  of  possible  premises  would  be  almost  unlimited. 

The  most  remarkable  of  all  the  types  of  logical  condition 
is  the  fourteenth,  namely  A  =  BC  I  be.  It  is  that  which 
expresses  the  division  of  a  genus  into  two  doubly  marked 
species,  and  might  be  illustrated  by  the  example — '  Com 
ponent  of  the  physical  universe  =  matter,  gravitating,  or 
not-mat'ter  (ether),  not-gravitating.' 

It  is  capable  of  only  two  distinct  logical  variations, 
namely,  A  =  BC  I  be  and  A  =  Be  I  bC.  By  transposition 
or  negative  change  of  the  letters  we  can  indeed  obtain 
six  different  expressions  of  each  of  these  propositions ; 
but  when  their  meanings  are  analysed,  by  working'  out 
the  combinations,  they  are  found  to  be  logically  equiva 
lent  to  one  or  other  of  the  above  two.  Thus  the  proposi 
tion  A  =  BC-|-&c  can  be  written  in  any  of  the  following 
five  other  modes, 

a  =  KM- Be,       B  =  CA-|-ca,       6=cA-|-Ca, 
C  =  AB  •!•«&,      c=aB-\-Ab. 

I  do  not  think  it  needful  at  present  to  publish  the 
complete  table  of  193  series  of  combinations  and  the 


INDUCTION. 


1G3 


premises  corresponding  to  each.  Such  a  table  enables  us 
by  mere  inspection  to  learn  the  laws  obeyed  by  any  set  of 
combinations  of  three  things,  and  is  to  logic  what  a  table 
of  factors  and  prime  numbers  is  to  the  theory  of  numbers, 
or  a  table  of  integrals  to  the  higher  mathematics.  The 
table  already  given  (p.  1 6 1 )  would  enable  a  person  with 
but  little  labour  to  discover  the  law  of  any  combinations. 
If  there  be  seven  combinations  (one  contradicted)  the  law 
must  be  of  the  eighth  type,  and  the  proper  variety  will  be 
apparent.  If  there  be  six  combinations  (two  contradicted), 
either  the  second,  eleventh,  or  twelfth  type  applies,  and  a 
certain  number  of  trials  will  disclose  the  proper  type  and 
variety.  If  there  be  but  two  combinations  the  law  must 
be  of  the  third  type,  and  so  on. 

The  above  investigations  are  complete  as  regards  the 
possible  logical  relations  of  two  or  three  terms.  But 
when  we  attempt  to  apply  the  same  kind  of  method  to 
the  relations  of  four  or  more  terms,  the  labour  becomes  im 
practicably  great.  Four  terms  give  sixteen  combinations 
compatible  with  the  laws  of  thought,  and  the  number  of 
possible  selections  of  combinations  is  no  less  than  21"  or 
6o3536.  The  following  table  shows  the  extraordinary 
manner  in  which  the  number  of  possible  logical  relations 
increases  with  the  number  of  terms  involved. 


Number  of 
terms. 

Number  of 
possible  com 
binations. 

Number  of  possible  selections  of  combi 
nations  corresponding  to  consistent  or  in 
consistent  logical  relations. 

2 

3 

4 
5 
6 

4 
8 
16 

32 
64 

16 
256 

65,536 
4,294,967,296 
18,446,744,073,709,551,616 

Some  years  of  continuous  labour  would  be  required  to 
ascertain  the  precise  number  of  types  of  laws  which  may 
govern  the  combinations  of  only  four  things,  and  but  a 
small  part  of  such  laws  would  be  exemplified  or  capable 


M  2 


164  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

of  practical  application  in  science.  The  purely  logical 
inverse  problem,  whereby  we  pass  from  combinations  to 
their  laws,  is  solved  in  the  preceding  pages,  as  far  as  it 
is  likely  to  be  for  a  long  time  to  come  ;  and  it  is  almost 
impossible  that  it  should  ever  be  carried  more  than  a 
single  step  further. 

Distinction  between  Perfect  and  Imperfect  Induction. 

We  cannot  proceed  further  with  advantage,  before 
noticing  the  extreme  difference  which  exists  between 
cases  of  perfect  and  those  of  imperfect  induction.  We 
call  an  induction  perfect  when  all  the  objects  or  combi 
nations  of  events  which  can  possibly  come  under  the  class 
treated  have  been  examined.  But  in  the  majority  of 
cases  it  is  impossible  to  collect  together,  or  in  any  way  to 
investigate,  the  properties  of  all  portions  of  a  substance  or 
of  all  the  individuals  of  a  race.  The  number  of  objects 
would  often  be  practically  infinite,  and  the  greater  part  of 
them  might  be  beyond  our  reach,  in  the  interior  of  the 
earth,  or  in  the  most  distant  parts  of  the  Universe.  In  all 
such  cases  induction  is  said  to  be  imperfect,  and  affected 
by  more  or  less  uncertainty.  As  some  writers  have  fallen 
into  much  error  concerning  the  functions  and  relative 
importance  of  these  two  branches  of  reasoning,  I  shall 
have  to  point  out  that — 

1.  Perfect  Induction  is  a  process  absolutely  requisite, 

both  in  the  performance  of  imperfect  induction  and 
in  the  treatment  of  large  bodies  of  facts  of  which 
our  knowledge  is  complete. 

2.  Imperfect  Induction  is  founded  on  Perfect  Induction, 

but  involves  another  process  of  inference  of  a 
widely  different  character. 

It  is  certain  that  if  I  can  draw  any  inference  at  all 
concerning  objects  not  examined,  it  must  be  done  on  the 


INDUCTION. 


data  afforded  by  the  objects  which  have  been  examined. 
If  I  judge  that  a  distant  star  obeys  the  law  of  gravity, 
it  must  be  because  all  other  material  objects  sufficiently 
known  to  me  obey  that  law.  If  I  venture  to  assert  that 
all  ruminant  animals  have  cloven  hoofs,  it  is  because  all 
ruminant  animals  which  have  come  to  my  notice  have 
cloven  hoofs.  On  the  other  hand  I  cannot  safely  say 
that  all  cryptogamous  plants  possess  a  purely  cellular 
structure,  because  some  such  plants  have  a  partially 
vascular  structure.  The  probability  that  a  new  crypto 
gam  will  be  cellular  only  can  be  estimated,  if  at  all,  on  the 
ground  of  the  comparative  numbers  of  known  cryptogams 
which  are  and  are  not  cellular.  Thus  the  first  step  in 
every  induction  will  consist  in  accurately  summing  up 
the  number  of  instances  of  a  particular  object  or  pheno 
menon  which  have  fallen  under  our  observation.  Adams 
and  Leverrier,  for  instance,  must  have  inferred  that  the 
undiscovered  planet  Neptune  would  obey  Bode's  law, 
because  all  the  planets  known  at  that  time  obeyed  it.  On 
what  principles  and  on  what  circumstances  the  passage 
from  the  known  to  the  apparently  unknown  is  warranted, 
must  be  carefully  discussed  in  the  next  section,  and  in 
various  parts  of  this  work. 

It  would  be  a  great  mistake,  however,  to  suppose  that 
Perfect  Induction  is  in  itself  useless.  Even  when  the 
enumeration  of  objects  belonging  to  any  class  is  complete, 
and  admits  of  no  inference  to  unexamined  objects,  the 
enumeration  of  our  knowledge  in  a  general  proposition  is 
a  process  of  so  much  importance  that  we  may  consider  it 
practically  necessary.  In  many  cases  we  may  render  our 
investigations  exhaustive ;  all  the  teeth  or  bones  of  an 
animal ;  all  the  cells  in  a  minute  vegetable  organ ;  all  the 
caves  in  a  mountain  side  ;  all  the  strata  in  a  geological 
section ;  all  the  coins  in  a  newly  found  hoard,  may  be  so 
completely  scrutinized  that  we  may  make  some  general 


166  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 


assertion  concerning  them  without  fear  of  mistake.  Every 
bone  might  be  proved  to  consist  of  phosphate  of  lime  ; 
every  cell  to  enclose  a  nucleus;  every  cave  to  contain 
remains  of  extinct  animals  ;  every  stratum  to  exhibit  signs 
of  marine  origin  ;  every  coin  to  be  of  Roman  manufacture. 
These  are  cases  where  our  investigation  is  limited  to  a 
definite  portion  of  matter,  or  a  definite  area  on  the  earth's 
surface. 

There  is  another  class  of  cases  where  induction  is 
naturally  and  necessarily  limited  to  a  definite  number  of 
alternatives.  Of  the  regular  solids  we  can  say  without 
the  least  doubt  that  no  one  has  more  than  twenty  faces, 
thirty  edges,  and  twenty  corners ;  for  by  the  principles 
of  geometry  we  learn  that  there  cannot  exist  more  than 
five  regular  solids,  of  each  of  which  we  easily  observe 
that  the  above  statements  are  true.  In  the  theory  of 
numbers,  an  endless  variety  of  perfect  inductions  might 
be  made ;  we  can  show  that  no  number  less  than  sixty 
possesses  so  many  divisors,  and  the  like  is  true  of  360 e, 
for  it  does  not  require  any  very  great  amount  of  labour  to 
ascertain  and  count  all  the  divisors  of  numbers  up  to  sixty 
or  360.  Similarly  I  can  assert  that  between  60,041  and 
60,077  no  prime  number  occurs,  because  the  exhaustive 
examination  of  those  who  have  constructed  tables  of  prime 
numbers  proves  it  to  be  so. 

In  matters  of  human  appointment  or  history,  we  can 
frequently  have  a  complete  limitation  to  the  numbers  of 
instances  to  be  included  in  an  induction.  We  might  show 
that  none  of  the  other  kings  of  England  reigned  so  long  as 
George  III ;  that  Magna  Charta  has  not  been  repealed  by 
any  subsequent  statute  ;  that  the  propositions  of  the  third 
book  of  Euclid  treat  only  of  circles ;  that  no  part  of  the 
works  of  Galen  mentions  the  fourth  figure  of  the  syl- 

«  Wallie's  'Treatise  of  Algebra'  (1685),  p.   22. 


INDUCTION.  167 


logism  ;  that  the  price  of  corn  in  England  has  never  been 
so  high  since  1847  as  ^  was  m  that  year ;  that  the  price 
of  the  English  funds  has  never  been  lower  than  it  was  on 
the  23rd  of  January,  1798,  when  it  fell  to  47  J. 

It  has  been  urged  against  this  process  of  Perfect  In 
duction  that  it  gives  no  new  information,  and  is  merely  a 
summing  up  in  a  brief  form  of  a  multitude  of  particulars. 
But  mere  abbreviation  of  mental  labour  is  one  of  the 
most  important  aids  we  can  enjoy  in  the  acquisition  of 
knowledge.  The  powers  of  the  human  mind  are  so  limited 
that  multiplicity  of  detail  is  alone  sufficient  to  prevent  its 
progress  in  many  directions.  Thought  would  be  prac 
tically  impossible  if  every  separate  fact  had  to  be  separately 
thought  and  treated.  Economy  of  mental  powTer  may  be 
considered  one  of  the  main  conditions  on  which  our  ele 
vated  intellectual  position  depends.  Most  mathematical 
processes  are  but  abbreviations  of  the  simpler  acts  of 
addition  and  subtraction.  The  invention  of  logarithms 
was  one  of  the  most  striking  additions  ever  made  to 
human  power  :  yet  it  was  a  mere  abbreviation  of  oper 
ations  which  could  have  been  done  before  had  a  sufficient 
amount  of  labour  been  available.  Similar  additions  to 
our  power  will,  it  is  hoped,  be  made  from  time  to  time, 
for  the  number  of  mathematical  problems  hitherto  solved 
is  but  an  indefinitely  small  portion  of  those  which  await 
solution,  because  the  labour  they  have  hitherto  demanded 
renders  them  impracticable.  So  it  is  really  throughout 
all  regions  of  thought.  The  amount  of  our  knowledge 
depends  upon  our  powers  of  bringing  it  within  prac 
ticable  compass.  Unless  we  arrange  and  classify  facts, 
and  condense  them  into  general  truths,  they  soon  sur 
pass  our  powers  of  memory,  and  serve  but  to  confuse. 
Hence  Perfect  Induction,  even  as  a  process  of  abbrevi 
ation,  is  absolutely  essential  to  any  high  degree  of 
mental  achievement. 


168  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 


Transition  from  Perfect  to  Imperfect  Induction. 

It  is  a  question  of  profound  difficulty  on  what  grounds 
we  are  warranted  in  inferring  the  future  from  the  present, 
or  the  nature  of  undiscovered  objects  from  those  which  we 
have  examined  with  our  senses.  We  pass  from  Perfect  to 
Imperfect  Induction  when  once  we  allow  our  conclusion  to 
pass,  at  all  events  apparently,  beyond  the  data  on  which  it 
was  founded.  In  making  such  a  step  we  seem  to  gain  a 
nett  addition  to  our  knowledge  ;  for  we  learn  the  nature 
of  what  was  unknown.  We  reap  where  we  have  never 
sown.  We  appear  to  possess  the  divine  power  of  creating 
knowledge,  and  reaching  with  our  mental  arms  far  beyond 
the  sphere  of  our  own  observation.  I  shall,  indeed,  have 
to  point  out  certain  methods  of  reasoning  in  which  we 
do  pass  altogether  beyond  the  sphere  of  the  senses,  and 
acquire  accurate  knowledge  which  observation  could  never 
have  given ;  but  it  is  not  imperfect  induction  that  ac 
complishes  such  a  task.  Of  imperfect  induction  itself,  I 
venture  to  assert  that  it  never  makes  any  real  addition  to 
our  knowledge,  in  the  meaning  of  the  expression  sometimes 
accepted.  As  in  other  cases  of  inference  it  merely  unfolds 
the  information  contained  in  past  observations  or  events  ; 
it  merely  renders  explicit  what  was  implicit  in  previous 
experience.  It  transmutes  knowledge,  but  certainly  does 
not  create  knowledge. 

There  is  no  fact  which  I  shall  more  constantly  keep 
before  the  reader's  mind  in  the  following  pages  than  that 
the  results  of  imperfect  induction,  however  well  authenti 
cated  and  verified,  are  never  more  than  probable.  We 
never  can  be  sure  that  the  future  will  be  as  the  present. 
We  hang  ever  upon  the  Will  of  the  Creator :  and  it  is  only 
so  far  as  He  has  created  two  things  alike,  or  maintains 
the  framework  of  the  world  unchanged  from  moment  to 


INDUCTION.  160 


moment,  that  our  most  careful  inferences  can  be  fulfilled. 
All  predictions,  all  inferences  which  reach  beyond  their 
data,  are  purely  hypothetical,  and  proceed  on  the  assump 
tion  that  new  events  will  conform  to  the  conditions 
detected  in  our  observation  of  past  events.  No  experience 
of  finite  duration  can  be  expected  to  give  an  exhaustive 
knowledge  of  all  the  forces  which  are  in  operation.  There 
is  thus  a  double  uncertainty ;  even  supposing  the  Uni 
verse  as  a  whole  to  proceed  unchanged,  we  do  not  really 
know  the  Universe  as  a  whole.  Comparatively  speaking 
we  know  only  a  point  in  its  infinite  extent,  and  a  moment 
in  its  infinite  duration.  We  cannot  be  sure,  then,  that  our 
observations  have  not  escaped  some  fact,  which  will  cause 
the  future  to  be  apparently  different  from  the  past ;  nor 
can  we  be  sure  that  the  future  really  will  be  the  outcome 
of  the  past.  We  proceed  then  in  all  our  inferences  to 
unexamined  objects  and  times  on  the  assumptions — 

1.  That  our  past  observation  gives  us  a  complete  know 

ledge  of  what  exists. 

2.  That  the  conditions  of  things  which  did  exist  will 

continue  to  be  the  conditions  of  things  which  will 

exist. 

We  shall  often  need  to  illustrate  the  character  of  our 
knowledge  of  nature  by  the  simile  of  a  ballot-box,  so 
often  employed  by  mathematical  writers  in  the  theory  of 
probability.  Nature  is  to  us  like  an  infinite  ballot-box, 
the  contents  of  which  are  being  continually  drawn,  ball 
after  ball,  and  exhibited  to  us.  Science  is  but  the  careful 
observation  of  the  succession  in  which  balls  of  various 
character  usually  present  themselves  ;  we  register  the 
combinations,  notice  those  which  seem  to  be  excluded  from 
occurrence,  and  from  the  proportional  frequency  of  those 
which  usually  appear  we  infer  the  probable  character  of 
future  drawings.  But  under  such  circumstances  certainty 
of  prediction  depends  on  two  conditions  : — 


170  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

1.  That  we  acquire  a  perfect  knowledge  of  the  compara 

tive  numbers  of -balls  of  each  kind  within  the  box. 

2.  That  the  contents  of  the  ballot-box  remain  unchanged. 
Of  the  latter  assumption,  or  rather  that  concerning  the 

constitution  of  the  world  which  it  illustrates,  the  logician 
or  physicist  can  have  nothing  to  say.  As  the  Creation  of 
the  Universe  is  necessarily  an  act  passing  all  experience 
and  all  conception,  so  any  change  in  that  Creation,  or,  it 
may  be,  a  termination  of  it,  must  likewise  be  infinitely  be 
yond  the  bounds  of  our  mental  faculties.  No  science,  no 
reasoning  upon  the  subject,  can  have  any  validity ;  for 
without  experience  we  are  without  the  basis  and  materials 
of  knowledge.  It  is  the  fundamental  postulate  accordingly 
of  all  inference  concerning  the  future,  that  there  shall  be 
no  arbitrary  change  in  the  subject  of  inference  ;  of  the  pro 
bability  or  improbability  of  such  a  change  I  conceive  that 
our  faculties  can  give  no  estimate. 

The  other  condition   of  inductive   inference — that  we 

acquire   an    approximately   complete   knowledge    of   the 

combinations  in  which  events  do  occur,  is  at  least  in  some 

degree  within  the  bounds  of  our  perceptive  and  mental 

powers.     There  are  many  branches  of  science  in  which 

phenomena  seem  to  be  governed  by  conditions  of  a  most 

fixed  and  general  character.     We  have  much  ground  in 

such   cases   for  believing  that   the   future   occurrence   of 

such  phenomena  may  be  calculated  and  predicted.     But 

the  whole  question  now  becomes  one  of  probability  and 

improbability.     We  leave  the  region  of  pure  logic  to  enter 

one    in   which   the   number  of  events  is  the  ground  of 

inference.     We  do  not  leave  the  region  of  logic ;  we  only 

leave  that  where  certainty,  affirmative  or  negative,  is  the 

result,  and  the  agreement  or  disagreement  of  qualities  the 

means  of  inference.     For  the  future,  number  and  quantity 

will  enter  into  most  of  our  processes  of  reasoning ;  but  then 

I  hold  that  number  and  quantity  are  but  portions  of  the 


INDUCTION.  171 


great  logical  domain.  I  venture  to  assert  that  number  is 
wholly  logical,  both  in  its  fundamental  nature  and  in  all 
its  complex  developments.  Quantity  in  all  its  forms  is  but 
a  development  of  number.  That  which  is  mathematical 
is  not  the  less  logical ;  if  anything  it  is  the  more  logical, 
in  the  sense  that  it  presents  logical  results  in  the  highest 
degree  of  complexity  and  variety. 

Before  proceeding  then  from  Perfect  to  Imperfect  In 
duction  I  break  off  in  some  degree  the  course  of  the  work, 
to  treat  of  the  logical  conditions  of  number.  I  shall  then 
employ  number  to  estimate  the  variety  of  combinations 
in  which  natural  phenomena  may  present  themselves,  and 
the  probability  or  improbability  of  their  occurrence  under 
definite  circumstances.  It  is  in  later  parts  of  the  work 
that  I  must  endeavour  to  establish,  in  a  complete  manner, 
the  notions  which  I  have  set  forth  upon  the  subject  of 
Imperfect  Induction,  as  applied  in  the  investigation  of 
Nature,  which  notions  may  be  thus  briefly  stated:— 

1.  Imperfect  Induction  entirely  rests  upon  Perfect  In 

duction  for  its  materials. 

2.  The  logical  process  by  which  we  seem  to  pass  directly 

from  examined  to  unexamined  cases  consists  in  an 
inverse  and  complex  application  of  deductive  in 
ference,  so  that  all  reasoning  may  be  said  to  be 
either  directly  or  inversely  deductive. 

3.  The  result  is  always  of  a  hypothetical  character,  and 

is  never  more  than  probable. 

4.  No  nett  addition  is  ever  made  to  our  knowledge  by 

reasoning ;  what  we  know  of  future  events  or  unex 
amined  objects  is  only  the  unfolded  contents  of 
our  previous  knowledge,  and  it  becomes  less  and 
less  probable  as  it  is  more  boldly  extended  to  re 
mote  cases. 


BOOK  II, 


CHAPTER    VIII. 

PRINCIPLES    OF   NUMBER. 

NOT  without  much  reason  did  Pythagoras  represent  the 
world  as  ruled  by  number.  Into  almost  all  our  acts  of 
clear  thought  number  enters,  and  in  proportion  as  we  can 
define  numerically  we  enjoy  exact  and  useful  knowledge 
of  the  Universe.  The  science  of  numbers,  too,  the  study  of 
the  principles  and  methods  of  reasoning  in  number,  has 
hitherto  presented  the  widest  and  most  practicable  train 
ing  in  logic.  So  free  and  energetic  has  been  the  study  of 
mathematical  forms,  compared  with  the  forms  and  laws  of 
logic,  that  mathematicians  have  passed  far  in  advance  of 
any  pure  logicians.  Occasionally,  in  recent  times,  they  have 
condescended  to  apply  their  great  algebraic  instruments 
to  a  reflex  advancement  of  the  primary  logical  science.  It 
is  thus  that  we  chiefly  owe  to  profound  mathematicians, 
such  as  Sir  John  Herschel,  Dr.  Whewell,  Professor  De 
Morgan  or  Dr.  Boole,  the  regeneration  of  logic  in  the 
present  century,  and  I  entertain  no  doubt  that  it  is  in 
maintaining  a  close  alliance  with  the  extensive  branches  of 
quantitative  reasoning  that  we  must  look  for  still  further 
progress  in  our  comprehension  of  qualitative  inference. 

I    cannot  assent,  indeed,  to    the  common   notion   that 


PRINCIPLES  OF  NUMBER.  173 

certainty  begins  and  ends  with  numerical  determination. 
Nothing  is  more  certain  and  accurate  than  logical  truth. 
The  laws  of  identity  and  difference  are  the  tests  of  all 
that  is  true  and  certain  throughout  the  range  of  thought, 
and  mathematical  reasoning  is  cogent  only  when  it  con 
forms  to  these  conditions,  of  which  logic  is  the  first 
development.  And  if  it  be  erroneous  to  suppose  that  all 
certainty  is  mathematical,  it  is  equally  an  error  to  imagine 
that  all  which  is  mathematical  is  certain.  Many  processes 
of  mathematical  reasoning  are  of  most  doubtful  validity. 
There  are  many  points  of  mathematical  doctrine  which  are 
and  must  long  remain  matter  of  opinion  ;  for  instance,  the 
best  form  of  the  definition  and  axiom  concerning  parallel 
lines,  or  the  true  nature  of  a  limit  or  a  ratio  of  infinitesimal 
quantities.  In  the  use  of  symbolic  reasoning  questions 
occur  at  every  point  on  which  the  best  mathematicians 
may  differ,  as  Bernouilli  and  Leibnitz  differed  irreconcile- 
ably  concerning  the  existence  of  the  logarithms  of  ne 
gative  quantities  a.  In  fact  we  no  sooner  leave  the  simple 
logical  conditions  of  number,  than  we  find  ourselves  in 
volved  in  a  mazy  and  mysterious  science  of  symbols. 

Mathematical  science  enjoys  no  monopoly,  and  not  even 
a  supremacy  in  certainty  of  results.  It  is  the  boundless 
extent  and  variety  of  quantitative  questions  that  surprises 
and  delights  the  mathematical  student.  When  simple 
logic  can  give  but  a  bare  answer  Yes  or  No,  the  algebraist 
raises  a  score  of  subtle  questions,  and  brings  out  a  score 
of  curious  results.  The  flower  and  the  fruit,  all  that  is 
attractive  and  delightful,  fall  to  the  share  of  the  mathe 
matician,  who  too  often  despises  the  pure  but  necessary 
stem  from  which  all  has  arisen.  But  in  no  part  of  human 
thought  can  a  reasoner  cast  himself  free  from  the  prior 
conditions  of  logical  correctness.  The  mathematician  is 

a  Montucla,  '  Histoire  cles  Mathematiques,'  vol.  iii.  p.  373. 


174  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

only  strong  and  true  as  long  as  he  is  logical,  and  if 
numbers  rule  the  world,  it  is  the  laws  of  logic  which  rule 
number. 

Nearly  all  writers  have  hitherto  been  strangely  content 
to  look  upon  numerical  reasoning  as  something  wholly 
apart  from  logical  inference.  A  long  divorce  has  existed 
between  quality  and  quantity,  and  it  has  not  been  un 
common  to  treat  them  as  contrasted  in  nature  and  re 
stricted  to  independent  branches  of  human  thought.  For 
my  own  part,  I  have  a  profound  belief  that  all  the  sciences 
meet  somewhere  upon  common  ground.  No  part  of  know 
ledge  can  stand  wholly  disconnected  from  other  parts  of 
the  great  universe  of  thought ;  it  is  incredible,  above  all, 
that  the  two  great  branches  of  abstract  science,  interlac 
ing  and  co-operating  in  every  discourse,  should  rest  upon 
totally  distinct  foundations.  I  assume  that  a  connection 
exists,  and  care  only  to  inquire,  What  is  its  nature  1  Does 
the  science  of  quantity  rest  upon  that  of  quality  ;  or,  vice 
versd,  does  the  science  of  quality  rest  upon  that  of 
quantity  I  There  might  conceivably  be  a  third  view,  that 
they  both  rest  upon  some  still  deeper  set  of  principles  yet 
undiscovered,  but  there  is  an  absence  of  any  sugges 
tions  to  this  effect.  The  late  Dr.  Boole  adopted  the  second 
view,  and  treated  logic  as  a  kind  of  algebra, — a  special 
case  of  analytical  reasoning  which  admits  but  the  two 
quantities — unity  and  zero.  He  proved  beyond  doubt 
that  a  deep  analogy  does  exist  between  the  forms  of 
algebraic  and  logical  deduction ;  and  could  this  analogy 
receive  no  other  explanation  we  must  have  accepted  his 
opinion,  however  strange.  But  I  shall  attempt  to  show 
that  just  the  reverse  explanation  is  the  true  one. 

I  hold  that  algebra  is  a  highly  developed  logic,  and 
number  but  logical  discrimination.  Logic  resembles  al- 

o  o 

gebra,  as  the  mould  resembles  that  which  is  cast  in  it. 
Logic  has  imposed   its    own   laws  upon  every  branch   of 


PRINCIPLES  OF  NUMBER.  175 

mathematical  science,  and  it  is  no  wonder  that  we  ever 
meet  with  the  traces  of  those  laws  from  the  domain  of 
which  we  can  never  emerge. 

The  Nature  of  Number. 

Number  is  but  another  name  for  diversity.  Exact 
identity  is  "unity,  and  with  difference  arises  plurality. 
An  abstract  notion,  as  was  pointed  out  (p.  33),  possesses 
a  certain  oneness.  The  quality  of  justice,  for  instance,  is 
one  and  the  same  in  whatever  just  acts  it  be  manifested. 
In  justice  itself  there  are  no  marks  of  difference  by  which 
to  discriminate  justice  from  justice.  But  one  just  act  can 
be  discriminated  from  another  just  act  by  many  circum 
stances  of  time  and  place,  and  we  can  count  and  number 
many  acts  each  thus  discriminated  from  every  other.  In 
like  manner  pure  gold  is  simply  pure  gold,  and  is  so  far 
one  and  the  same  throughout.  But  besides  its  intrinsic 
and  invariable  qualities,  gold  occupies  space  and  must 
have  shape  or  size.  Portions  of  gold  are  always  mutually 
exclusive  and  capable  of  discrimination,  at  least  in  respect 
that  they  must  be  each  without  the  other.  Hence  they 
may  be  numbered. 

Plurality  arises  when  and  only  when  we  detect  differ 
ence.  For  instance,  in  counting  a  number  of  gold  coins 
I  must  count  each  coin  once,  and  not  more  than  once.  Let 
C  denote  a  coin,  and  the  mark  above  it  the  position  in 
the  order  of  counting.  Then  I  must  count  the  coins 


I  should  make  the  third  coin  into  two,  and  should  imply 
the  existence  of  difference  where  there  is  not  difference5. 
C'"  and  C'"  are  but  the  names  of  one  coin  named  twice 

b  'Pure  Logic,'  Appendix,  p.  82,  §  192. 


176  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

over.  But  according  to  one  of  the  conditions  of  logical 
symbols,  which  I  have  called  the  Law  of  Unity  (p.  86), 
the  same  name  repeated  has  no  effect,  and 

Al  A  =  A. 

We  must  apply  the  Law  of  Unity,  and  must  reduce  all 
identical  alternatives  before  we  can  count  with  certainty 
and  use  the  processes  of  numerical  calculation.  Identical 
alternatives  are  harmless  in  logic,  but  produce  deadly 
error  in  number.  Thus  logical  science  ascertains  the 
nature  of  the  mathematical  unit,  and  the  definition  may 
be  given  in  these  terms — A  unit  is  any  object  of  thought 
which  can  be  discriminated  from  every  other  object  treated 
as  a  unit  in  the  same  problem. 

It  has  often  been  said  that  units  are  units  in  respect  of 
being  perfectly  similar  to  each  other ;  but  though  they 
may  be  perfectly  similar  in  some  respects,  they  must  be 
different  in  at  least  one  point,  otherwise  they  would  be 
incapable  of  plurality.  If  three  coins  were  so  similar 
that  they  occupied  the  same  space  at  the  same  time,  they 
would  not  be  three  coins,  but  one.  It  is  a  property  of 
space  that  every  point  is  discriminable  from  every  other 
point,  and  in  time  every  moment  is  necessarily  distinct 
from  any  other  moment  before  or  after.  Hence  we  fre 
quently  count  in  space  or  time,  and  Locke,  with  some 
other  philosophers,  has  even  held  that  number  arises  from 
repetition  in  time.  Beats  of  a  pendulum  might  be  so 
perfectly  similar  that  we  could  discover  no  difference 
except  that  one  beat  is  before  and  another  after.  Time 
alone  is  here  the  ground  of  difference  and  is  a  sufficient 
foundation  for  the  discrimination  of  plurality  ;  but  it  is 
by  no  means  the  only  foundation.  Three  coins  are  three 
coins,  whether  we  count  them  successively  or  regard  them 
all  simultaneously.  In  many  cases  neither  time  nor  space 
is  the  ground  of  difference,  but  pure  quality  alone  enters. 
AVe  can  discriminate  for  instance  the  weight,  inertia,  and 


PRINCIPLES  OF  NUMBER.  177 


hardness  of  gold  as  three  qualities,  though  none  of  these 
is  before  or  after  the  other,  either  in  space  or  time. 
Every  means  of  discrimination  may  be  a  source  of 
plurality. 

Our  logical  notation  may  be  used  to  express  the  rise  of 
number.  The  symbol  A  stands  for  one  thing  or  one  class, 
and  in  itself  must  be  regarded  as  a  unit,  because  no  differ 
ence  is  specified.  But  the  combinations  AB  and  A.b  are 
necessarily  tivo,  because  they  cannot  logically  coalesce,  and 
there  is  a  mark  B  which  distinguishes  one  from  the  other. 
A  logical  definition  of  the  number  four  is  given  in  the 
combinations  ABC,  ABc1,  A.bC,  Abe.,  where  there  is  a  double 
difference,  and  as  Puck  says — 

'  Yet  but  three  ?     Come  one  more  ; 
Two  of  both  kinds  makes  up  four.' 

I  conceive  that  all  numbers  might  be  represented  as 
arising  out  of  the  combinations  of  the  Abecedarium,  more 
or  less  of  each  series  being  struck  out  by  various  logical 
conditions.  The  number  three,  for  instance,  arises  from 
the  condition  that  A  must  be  either  B  or  C,  so  that  the 
combinations  are  ABC,  ABc,  A&C. 

Of  Numerical  Abstraction. 

There  will  now  be  little  difficulty  in  forming  a  clear 
notion  of  the  nature  of  numerical  abstraction.  It  consists 
in  abstracting  the  character  of  the  difference  from  which 
plurality  arises,  retaining  merely  the  fact.  When  I  speak 
of  three  men  I  need  not  at  once  specify  the  marks  by 
which  each  may  be  known  from  each.  Those  marks  must 
exist  if  they  are  really  three  men  and  not  one  and  the 
same,  and  in  speaking  of  them  as  many  I  imply  the 
existence  of  the  requisite  differences.  Abstract  number, 
then,  is  the  empty  form  of  difference;  the  abstract 

N 


178  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

number  three  asserts  the  existence  of  marks  without 
specifying  their  kind. 

Numerical  abstraction  is  then  a  totally  different  process 
from  logical  abstraction  (see  p.  33),  for  in  the  latter 
process  we  drop  out  of  notice  the  very  existence  of 
difference  and  plurality.  In  forming  the  abstract  notion 
hardness,  for  instance,  I  drop  out  of  notice  altogether  the 
diverse  circumstances  in  which  the  quality  may  appear. 
It  is  the  concrete  notion  three  hard  objects,  which  asserts 
the  existence  of  hardness  along  with  sufficient  other 
undefined  qualities,  to  mark  out  three  such  objects. 
Numerical  thought  is  indeed  closely  interwoven  with 
logical  thought.  We  cannot  use  a  concrete  term  in  the 
plural,  as  men,  without  implying  that  there  are  marks  of 
difference.  Only  when  we  use  a  term  in  the  singular 
and  abstract  sense  man,  do  we  deal  with  unity,  unbroken 
by  difference. 

The  origin  of  the  great  generality  of  number  is  now 
apparent.  Three  sounds  differ  from  three  colours,  or 
three  riders  from  three  horses ;  but  they  agree  in  respect 
of  the  variety  of  marks  by  which  they  can  be  discriminated. 
The  symbols  i  +  i  +  i  are  thus  the  empty  marks  asserting 
the  fact  of  discrimination  which  may  apply  to  objects 
wholly  independently  of  their  peculiar  nature. 

Concrete  and  Abstract  Numbers. 

The  common  distinction  between  concrete  and  ab 
stract  numbers  can  now  be  easily  stated.  In  proportion 
as  we  specify  the  logical  character  of  the  things  num 
bered,  we  render  them  concrete.  In  the  abstract  num 
ber  three  there  is  no  statement  of  the  points  in  which 
the  three  objects  agree  ;  but  in  three  coins,  three  men,  or 
three  horses,  not  only  are  the  variety  of  objects  defined, 


PRINCIPLES  OF  NUMBER.  179 

but  their  nature  is  restricted.  Concrete  number  thus 
implies  the  same  consciousness  of  difference  as  abstract 
number,  but  it  is  mingled  with  a  groundwork  of  similarity 
expressed  in  the  logical  terms.  There  is  similarity  or 
identity  so  far  as  logical  terms  enter ;  difference  so  far  as 
the  terms  are  merely  numerical. 

The  reason  of  the  important  Law  of  Homogeneity 
will  now  be  apparent.  This  law  asserts  that  in  every 
arithmetical  calculation  the  logical  nature  of  the  things 
numbered  must  remain  unaltered.  The  specified  logical 
agreement  of  the  things  numbered  must  not  be  affected  by 
the  unspecified  numerical  differences.  A  calculation  would 
be  palpably  absurd  which,  after  commencing  with  length, 
gave  a  result  in  hours.  It  is  in  reality  equally  absurd  in 
a  purely  arithmetical  point  of  view  to  deduce  areas  from 
the  calculation  of  lengths,  masses  from  the  combination  of 
volume  and  density,  or  momenta  from  mass  and  velocity. 
It  must  remain  for  subsequent  consideration  in  what  sense 
we  may  truly  say  that  two  linear  feet  multiplied  by  two 
linear  feet  give  four  superficial  feet,  but  arithmetically  it 
is  absurd,  because  there  is  a  change  of  unit. 

As  a  general  rule  we  treat  in  each  calculation  only 
objects  of  one  nature.  We  do  not,  and  cannot  properly 
add,  in  the  same  sum  yards  of  cloth  and  pounds  of  sugar. 
We  cannot  even  conceive  the  result  of  adding  area  to  velo 
city,  or  length  to  density,  or  weight  to  value.  The  unit 
numbered  and  added  must  have  a  basis  of  homogeneity, 
or  must  be  reducible  to  some  common  denominator. 
Nevertheless  it  is  quite  possible,  and  in  fact  common,  to 
treat  in  one  complex  calculation  the  most  heterogeneous 
quantities,  on  the  condition  that  each  kind  of  object  is 
kept  distinct,  and  treated  numerically  only  in  conjunction 
with  its  own  kind.  Different  units,  so  far  as  their 
logical  differences  are  specified,  must  never  be  substituted 
one  for  the  other.  Chemists  continually  use  equations 

N    2 


180  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 


which  assert  the  equivalence  of  groups  of  atoms.  Ordinary 
fermentation  is  represented  by  the  formula 

C  H1206=  2C2H60  +  2C02. 

Three  kinds  of  units,  the  atoms  respectively  of  Carbon, 
Hydrogen,  and  Oxygen,  are  here  intermingled,  but  there  is 
really  a  separate  equation  in  regard  to  each  kind.  Mathe 
maticians  also  employ  compound  equations  of  the  same 
kind  ;  for  in  a  +  I  N/  —  i  =  c  +  d  ^/  —  i,  it  is  impossible  by 
ordinary  addition  to  add  a  to  b  ^/  —  i .  Hence  we  really 
have  the  separate  equations  a  =  c,  and  b  =  dc.  Similarly 
an  equation  between  two  quaternions  is  equivalent  to 
four  equations  between  ordinary  quantities,  whence  in 
deed  the  origin  of  the  name  quaternion. 

Analogy  of  Logical  and  Numerical  Terms. 

If  my  assertion  is  correct  that  number  arises  out  of 
logical  conditions,  we  ought  to  find  number  obeying  all 
the  laws  and  conditions  of  logic.  It  is  almost  super 
fluous  to  point  out  that  this  is  the  case  with  the  funda 
mental  laws  of  identity  and  difference,  and  it  only  remains 
for  me  to  show  that  mathematical  symbols  do  really  obey 
the  special  conditions  of  logical  symbols  which  were 
formerly  pointed  out  (p.  39).  Thus  the  Law  of  Com- 
mutativeness,  is  equally  true  of  quality  and  quantity.  As 
in  logic  we  have 

AB  =  BA, 

so  in  mathematics  it  is  familiarly  known  that 
2  x  3  =  3  x  2,     or     x  *y  =  y  xx. 

The  properties  of  space,  in  short,  are  as  indifferent  in 
pure  multiplication  as  we  found  them  in  pure  logical 
thought. 

c  De  Morgan's  '  Trigonometry  and  Double  Algebra,'  p.  126. 


PRINCIPLES  OF  NUMBER.  181 

Similarly,  just  as  in  logic 

triangle  or  square  =  square  or  triangle, 
or  generally  A I  B  =  B I  A, 

so  in  quantity  2+3  =  3  +  2, 

or  generally  x  +  iy  =  y  +  x. 

The  symbol  I  is  not  identical  with  + ,  but  it  is  so  far 
analogous. 

How  far,  now,  is    it   true   that  mathematical  symbols 

v 

obey  the  law  of  simplicity  expressed  in  the  form 

AA  =  A, 
or  the  example 

Round  round  =  round  ? 

Apparently  there  are  but  two  numbers  which  obey  this 
law  ;  for  it  is  certain  that 

x  x  x  —  x 
is  true  only  in  the  two  cases  when  x  =  i  or  o. 

In  reality  all  numbers  obey  the  law,  for  2  x  2  =  2  is  not 
really  analogous  to  AA  =  A.     According  to  the  definition 
of  a  unit  already  given,  each  unit  is  discriminated  from 
each  other  in  the  same   problem,  so  that  in  2'  x  2 ',  the 
first  two    involves   a    different   discrimination   from    the 
second  ttvo.     I  get  four  kinds  of  things,  for  instance,  if  I 
first  discriminate  '  heavy  and  light '  and  then  '  cubical  and 
spherical/  for  we  now  have  the  following  classes- 
heavy,  cubical.          light,  cubical, 
heavy,  spherical.      light,  spherical. 
But  suppose  that  my  two  classes   are   in   both  cases 
discriminated  by  the  same  difference  of  light  and  heavy, 
then  we  have 

hearvy  heavy  =  heavy, 
heavy    light  -  o, 
light    heavy  =  o, 
light      light  =  light. 

In  short,  twice  two  is  two  unless  we  take  care  that  the 
second  two  has  a  different  meaning  from  the  first.     But 


182  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

under   similar   circumstances    logical    terms   would    give 
exactly  the  like  result,  and  it  is  not  true  that  A' A"  =  A', 
identically  where  A"  is  different  in  meaning  from  A'. 
In  an  exactly   similar  manner  it  may  be  shown    that 

the  Law  of  Unity 

A-I-A  =  A 

holds  true  alike  of  logical  and  mathematical  terms.  It  is 
absurd  indeed  to  say  that 

X  +  £C  =  X 

except  in  the  one  case  when  x  —  absolute  zero.  But  this 
contradiction  x  +  x  =  x  arises  from  the  fact  that  we  have 
already  defined  the  unit  in  one  x  as  differing  from  those  in 
the  other.  Under  such  circumstances  the  Law  of  Unity 
does  not  apply.  For  if  in 

A'IA"  =  A' 

we  mean  that  A"  is  in  any  way  different  from  A'  the 
assertion  of  identity  is  evidently  false. 

The  contrast  then  which  seems  to  exist  between  logical 
and  mathematical  symbols  is  only  apparent.  It  is  because 
the  Law  of  Simplicity  and  Unity  must  always  be  ob 
served  in  the  operation  of  counting  that  those  laws  can 
no  longer  be  operative.  This  is  the  understood  condition 
under  which  we  use  all  numerical  symbols.  Whenever 
I  use  the  symbol  5  I  really  mean 

i  +  i  +  i  +  i  +  i, 

and  it  is  perfectly  understood  that  each  of  these  units  is 
distinct  from  each  other.  If  requisite  I  might  mark  them 
thus 

i'  +  i"  +  i'"  +  i""  +  i""'. 
Were  this  not  the  case  and  were  the  units  really 

I'+i'  +  f'  +  i"^!"", 
the  Law  of  Unity  would,  as  before  remarked,  apply,  and 

i"+l"=l". 
Mathematical  symbols  then  obey  all  the  laws  of  logical 


PRINCIPLES  OF  NUMBER.  183 

symbols,  but  two  of  these  laws  seein  to  be  inapplicable 
simply  because  they  are  presupposed  in  the  definition  of 
the  mathematical  unit.  Logic  thus  lays  down  the  con 
ditions  of  number,  and  the  science  of  arithmetic  developed 
as  it  is  into  all  the  wondrous  branches  of  mathematical 
calculus  is  but  an  outgrowth  of  logical  discrimination. 

Principle  of  Mathematical  Inference. 

As  I  have  asserted,  the  universal  principle  of  all 
reasoning  is  that  which  allows  us  to  substitute  like  for 
like.  I  have  now  to  point  out  that  in  the  mathema 
tical  sciences  this  principle  is  involved  in  each  step  of 
reasoning.  It  is  in  these  sciences  indeed  that  we  meet 
with  the  clearest  cases  of  substitution,  and  it  is  the 
simplicity  with  which  the  principle  can  be  applied  which 
probably  led  to  the  comparatively  early  perfection  of  the 
sciences  of  geometry  and  arithmetic.  Euclid,  and  the 
Greek  mathematicians  from  the  first,  recognised  equality 
as  the  fundamental  relation  of  quantitative  thought,  but 
Aristotle  rejected  the  exactly  analogous,  but  far  more 
general  relation  of  identity,  and  thus  crippled  the  formal 
science  of  logic  as  it  has  descended  to  the  present  day. 

Geometrical  reasoning  starts  from  the  Axiom  that 
'things  equal  to  the  same  thing  are  equal  to  each  other/ 
Two  equalities  enable  us  to  infer  a  third  equality  ;  and  this 
is  true  not  only  of  lines  and  angles,  but  of  areas,  volumes, 
numbers,  intervals  of  time,  forces,  velocities,  degrees  of 
intensity,  or,  in  short,  anything  which  is  capable  of  being 
equal  or  unequal.  Two  stars  equally  bright  with  the 
same  star  must  be  equally  bright  with  each  other,  and  two 
forces  equally  intense  with  a  third  force  are  equally 
intense  with  each  other.  It  is  remarkable  that  Euclid 
has  not  expressly  stated  two  other  axioms,  the  truth  of 
which  is  necessarily  implied.  The  second  axiom  should 


184  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

be  that  '  Two  things  of  which  one  is  equal  and  the  other 
unequal  to  a  third  common  thing,  are  unequal  to  each 
other/  An  equality  and  inequality,  in  short,  may  give  an 
inequality,  and  this  is  equally  true  with  the  first  axiom  of 
all  kinds  of  quantity.  If  Venus,  for  instance,  agrees  with 
Mars  in  density,  but  Mars  differs  from  Jupiter,  then  Venus 
differs  from  Jupiter.  A  third  axiom  must  exist  to  the 
effect  that  'Things  unequal  to  the  same  thing  may  or 
may  not  be  equal  to  each  other.'  Two  inequalities  give 
no  ground  of  inference  tvhatever.  If  we  only  know,  for 
instance,  that  Mercury  and  Jupiter  differ  in  density  from 
Mars,  we  cannot  say  whether  or  not  they  agree  between 
themselves.  As  a  fact  they  do  not  agree  ;  but  Venus  and 
Mais  on  the  other  hand  both  differ  from  Jupiter  and  yet 
closely  agree  with  each  other.  The  force  of  the  axioms 
can  be  most  clearly  illustrated  by  drawing  lines d. 

The  general  conclusion  must  be  then  that  where  there  is 
equality  there  may  be  inference,  but  where  there  is  not 
equality  there  cannot  be  inference  A  plain  induction  will 
lead  us  to  believe  that  equality  is  the  condition  of  inference 
concerning  quantity.  All  the  three  axioms  may  in  fact 
be  summed  up  in  one,  to  the  effect,  that  '  in  whatever 
relation  one  quantity  stands  to  another,  it  stands  in  the 
same  relation  to  the  equal  of  that  other.' 

The  active  power  is  always  the  substitution  of  equals, 
and  it  is  an  accident  that  in  a  pair  of  equalities  we  can 
make  the  substitution  in  two  ways.  From  a  =  b  =  cwe 
can  infer  a  =  c,  either  by  substituting  in  a  =  b  the  value  of 
b  as  given  in  b  —  c,  or  else  by  substituting  in  b  =  c  the 
value  of  b  as  given  in  a  =  b.  In  a  —  b  ^  d  we  can  make 
but  the  one  substitution  of  a  for  b.  In  e  ^f^  g  we  can 
make  no  substitution  and  get  no  inference. 

In  mathematics  the  relations  in  which  terms  may  stand 
to  each  other  are  far  more  varied  than  in  pure  logic,  yet 

'Elementary  Lessons  in  Logic'  (Macmillan),  p.  123. 


PRINCIPLES  OF  NUMBER.  185 

our  principle  of  substitution  always  holds  true.  We  may 
say  in  the  most  general  manner  that  In  whatever  relation 
one  quantity  stands  to  another,  it  stands  in  the  same  relation 
to  the  equal  of  that  other.  In  this  axiom  we  sum  up  a 
number  of  axioms  which  have  been  stated  in  more  or  less 
detail  by  algebraists e.  Thus.  '  If  equal  quantities  be 
added  to  equal  quantities,  the  sums  will  be  equal.'  To 
explain  this,  let 

a  =  b,  c  =  d. 

Now  a  +  c,  whatever  it  means,   must   be    identical  with 

itself,  so  that 

a  +  c  —  a  +  c. 

In  one  side  of  this  equation  substitute  for  the  quantities 
their  equivalents,  and  we  have  the  axiom  proved 

a  +  c  —  l>  +  d. 

The  similar  axiom  concerning  subtraction  is  equally  evi 
dent,  for  whatever  a  —  c  may  mean  it  is  equal  to  a  —  c, 
and  therefore  by  substitution  to  b  —  d.  Again,  '  if  equal 
quantities  be  multiplied  by  the  same  or  equal  quantities, 
the  products  will  be  equal/  For  evidently 

ac  =  ac, 
arid  if  for  c  in  one  side  we  substitute  its  equal  d,  we  have 

ac  —  ad, 
and  a  second  similar  substitution  gives  us 

ac  —  bd. 

We  might  prove  a  like  axiom  concerning  division  in  an 
exactly  similar  manner.  I  might  even  extend  the  list  of 
axioms  and  say  that  '  Equal  powers  of  equal  number  are 
equal.'  For  certainly,  whatever  a  x  a  x  a  may  mean,  it  is 
equal  to  a  x  a  x  a  ;  hence  by  our  usual  substitution 

a*axa  =  bxbxb, 
or  a3  =  Z>3. 

The  truth  will  hold  of  roots,  that  is  to  say, 

y^~=  */T, 

e  Todhunter's  'Algebra,'  3rd  ed.  p.  40. 


186  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

provided  that  the  same  roots  are  taken,  that  is  that  the 
root  of  a  shall  really  be  related  to  a  as  the  root  of  b  is 
to  I.  The  ambiguity  of  meaning  of  an  operation  thus  fails 
in  any  way  to  shake  the  universality  of  the  principle. 

We  may  go  further  and  assert  that,  not  only  the  above 
common  relations,  but  all  other  known  or  conceivable 
mathematical  relations  obey  the  same  principle.  Let  Pa 
denote  in  the  most  general  manner  that  we  do  something 
with  the  quantity  a ;  then  if  a  =  b  it  follows  that 

Pa  =  P6. 
Let  us  make  Pa,  for  instance,  mean 

a3  -3  a2  +   2  a  +  5  ; 

then  it  necessarily  follows  that  this  quantity  is  exactly 
equal  to  b3  -  3  b2  +  2  I  +  5. 

The  reader  will  also  remember  that  one  of  the  most 
frequent  operations  in  mathematical  reasoning  is  to  sub 
stitute  for  a  quantity  its  equal,  as  known  either  by 
assumed,  natural,  or  self-evident  condition.  Whenever  a 
quantity  appears  twice  over  in  a  problem,  we  may  apply 
what  we  learn  of  its  relations  in  one  place  to  its  relations 
in  the  other.  All  reasoning  in  mathematics,  as  in  other 
branches  of  science,  thus  involves  the  principle  of  treating 
equals  equally,  or  similars  similarly.  In  whatever  way  we 
employ  quantitative  reasoning  in  the  remaining  parts  of 
this  work,  we  never  can  desert  the  simple  principle  on 
which  we  first  set  out. 

Reasoning  by  Inequalities. 

I  have  stated  that  all  the  processes  of  mathematical 
reasoning  may  be  deduced  from  the  principle  of  substitution. 
Exceptions  to  this  assertion  may  seem  to  exist  in  the  use 
of  inequalities.  The  greater  of  a  greater  is  undoubtedly  a 
greater,  and  what  is  less  than  a  less  is  certainly  less. 
Snowdon  is  higher  than  the  Wrekin,  and  Ben  Nevis  than 


PRINCIPLES  OF  NUMBER.  187 

Snowdon  ;  therefore  Ben  Nevis  is  higher  than  the  Wrekin. 
But  a  little  consideration  discloses  much  reason  for  be 
lieving  that  even  in  such  cases,  where  equality  does  not 
apparently  enter,  the  force  of  the  reasoning  entirely 
depends  upon  underlying  and  implied  equalities. 

In  the  first  place,  two  statements  of  mere  difference  do 
not  give  any  ground  of  inference.  We  learn  nothing 
concerning  the  comparative  heights  of  St.  Paul's  and 
Westminster  Abbey  from  the  assertions  that  they  both 
differ  in  height  from  St.  Peter's  at  Rome.  Thus  we  need 
something  more  than  mere  inequality  ;  we  require  one 
identity  in  addition,  namely  the  identity  in  direction  of 
the  two  differences.  Thus  we  cannot  employ  inequalities 
in  the  simple  way  in  which  we  do  equalities,  and,  when 
we  try  to  express  exactly  what  other  conditions  are 
requisite,  we  shall  find  ourselves  lapsing  into  the  use  of 
equalities  or  identities. 

In  the  second  place,  every  argument  by  inequalities  may 
be  represented  with  at  least  equal  clearness  and  force  in 
the  form  of  equalities.  Thus  we  clearly  express  that  a 
is  greater  than  b  by  the  equation 

a  =  b  +  p,  (i) 

where  p  is  an  intrinsically  positive  quantity,  denoting  the 
difference  of  a  and  b.  Similarly  we  express  that  b  is 
greater  than  c  by  the  equation 

b  =  c  +  q,  (2) 

and  substituting  for  b  in   (i)  its  value  in    (2)  we  have 

a  =  c  +  q  +  p.  (3) 

Now  as  p  and  q  are  both  positive,  it  follows  that  a  is 
greater  than  c,  and  we  have  the  exact  amount  of  excess 
specified.  It  will  be  easily  seen  that  the  reasoning  con 
cerning  that  which  is  less  than  a  less  will  result  in  an 

equation  of  the  form 

c  —  a  —  q  —  p. 
Every  argument  by  inequalities  may  then  be  thrown 


)  88  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

into  the  form  of  an  equality ;  but  the  converse  is  not  true. 
We  cannot  possibly  prove  that  two  quantities  are  equal  by 
merely  asserting  that  they  are  both  greater  or  both  less 
than  another  quantity.  From  e  >f  and  g  >f,  or  e  <f  and 
g  <f,  we  can  infer  no  relation  between  e  and  g.  And  if  the 
reader  take  the  equations  x  =  y  =  3  and  attempt  to  prove 
that  therefore  x  =  3,  by  throwing  them  into  inequalities,  he 
will  find  it  impossible  to  do  so. 

From  these  considerations  I  gather  that  reasoning  in 
arithmetic  or  algebra  by  so-called  inequalities  is  only  an 
imperfectly  expressed  reasoning  by  equalities,  and  when 
we  want  to  exhibit  exactly  and  clearly  the  conditions  of 
reasoning,  we  are  obliged  to  use  equalities  explicitly.  Just 
as  in  pure  logic  a  negative  proposition,  as  expressing  mere 
difference,  cannot  be  the  means  of  inference,  so  inequality 
can  never  really  be  the  true  ground  of  inference.  I  do  riot 
deny  that  affirmation  and  negation,  agreement  and  differ 
ence,  equality  and  inequality,  are  pairs  of  equally  funda 
mental  relations,  but  I  assert  that  inference  is  possible  only 
where  affirmation,  agreement,  or  equality,  some  species  of 
identity  in  fact,  is  present,  explicitly  or  implicitly. 

Arithmetical  Reasoning. 

It  might  seem  somewhat  inconsistent  that  I  assert 
number  to  arise  out  of  difference  or  discrimination,  and 
yet  hold  that  no  reasoning  can  be  grounded  on  difference. 
Number,  of  course,  opens  a  most  wide  sphere  for  inference, 
and  a  little  consideration  shows  that  this  is  due  to  the 
unlimited  series  of  identities  which  spring  up  out  of 
numerical  abstraction  If  six  people  are  sitting  on  six 
chairs,  there  is  no  resemblance  between  the  chairs  and  the 
people  in  logical  character.  But  if  we  overlook  all  the 
qualities  both  of  a  chair  and  a  person,  and  merely  re 
member  that  there  are  marks  bv  which  each  of  six  chairs 


PRINCIPLES  OF  NUMBER.  189 

may  be  discriminated  from  each  other,  and  similarly  with 
the  people,  then  there  arises  a  resemblance  between  the 
chairs  and  people,  and  this  resemblance  in  number  may  be 
the  ground  of  inference.  If  on  another  occasion  the  chairs 
are  filled  by  people  again,  we  may  infer  that  these  people 
must  resemble  the  others  in  number,  though  they  need  not 
resemble  them  in  any  other  points. 

Groups  of  units  are  what  we  really  treat  in  arithmetic. 
The  number  Jive  is  really  i  +  i  +  i  +  i  +  i,  but  for  the  sake 
of  conciseness  we  substitute  the  more  compact  sign  5,  or 
the  name  five.  These  names  being  arbitrarily  imposed  in 
any  one  manner,  an  indefinite  variety  of  relations  spring 
up  between  them  which  are  not  in  the  least  arbitrary.  If 
we  define  four  asi  +  i+i  +  i,  and  five  asi  +  i  +  i  +  i  +  i, 
then  of  course  it  follows  th&ijive  -  four  +  i  ;  but  it  would 
be  equally  possible  to  take  this  latter  equality  as  a  defi 
nition,  in  which  case  one  of  the  former  equalities  would 
become  an  inference.  It  is  hardly  requisite  to  decide  how 
we  define  the  names  of  numbers,  provided  we  remember 
that  out  of  the  infinitely  numerous  relations  of  one  number 
to  others,  some  one  relation  expressed  in  an  equality 
must  be  a  definition  of  the  number  in  question  and  the 
other  relations  immediately  become  necessary  inferences. 

In  the  science  of  number  the  variety  of  classes  which 
can  be  formed  is  altogether  infinite,  and  statements  of 
perfect  generality  may  be  made  subject  only  to  difficulty 
or  exception  at  the  lower  end  of  the  scale.  Every  existing 
number  for  instance  belongs  to  the  class 

m  +  7 ; 

that  is,  every  number  must  be  the  sum  of  another  number 
and  seven,  except  of  course  the  first  six  or  seven  numbers, 
negative  quantities  not  being  here  taken  into  account. 
Every  number  is  the  half  of  some  other,  and  so  on.  The 
subject  of  generalization,  as  exhibited  in  arithmetical  or 
mathematical  truths,  is  an  indefinitely  wide  one.  In 


190  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

number  we  are  only  at  the  first  step  of  an  extensive 
series  of  generalizations.  A  number  is  general  as  compared 
with  the  particular  things  numbered,  so  we  may  have 
general  symbols  for  numbers,  or  general  symbols  not  for 
numbers,  but  for  the  relations  between  undetermined  num 
bers.  There  is,  in  fact,  an  unlimited  hierarchy  of  successive 
generalizations. 

O 

Numerically  Definite  Reasoning. 

It  was  first  discovered  by  Prof,  de  Morgan  that  many 
arguments  are  valid  which  combine  logical  and  numerical 
reasoning,  although  they  could  in  no  way  be  included  in 
the  ancient  logical  formulas.  He  developed  the  doctrine 
of  the  'Numerically  Definite  Syllogism,'  fully  explained 
in  his  'Formal  Logic'  (pp.  141-170).  Dr.  Boole  also 
devoted  considerable  attention  to  the  determination  of 
what  he  called  'Statistical  Conditions/  meaning  the 
numerical  conditions  of  logical  classes.  In  a  paper  pub 
lished  among  the  Memoirs  of  the  Manchester  Literary  and 
Philosophical  Society,  Third  Series,  vol.  IV.  p.  33° 
(Session  1869-70),  I  have  pointed  out  that  we  can  apply 
arithmetical  calculation  to  the  Logical  Abecedarium. 
Having  given  certain  logical  conditions  and  the  numbers  of 
objects  in  certain  classes,  we  can  either  determine  the 
number  of  objects  in  other  classes  governed  by  those  con 
ditions,  or  can  show  what  further  data  are  required  to 
determine  them.  As  an  example  of  the  kind  of  questions 
treated  in  numerical  logic,  and  the  mode  of  treatment,  I 
give  the  following  problem  suggested  by  De  Morgan,  with 
my  mode  of  representing  its  solution  f . 

f  It  has  been  pointed  out  to  me  by  Mr.  A.  J.  Ellis,  F.R.S.,  that  my 
solution,  as  given  in  the  Memoirs  of  the  Manchester  Philosophical  Society, 
does  not  exactly  answer  to  the  conditions  of  the  problem,  and  I  therefore 
substitute  above  a  more  satisfactory  solution. 


PRINCIPLES  OF  NUMBER.  191 


'  For  every  man  in  the  house  there  is  a  person  who  is 
aged ;    some  of  the  men  are   not  aged.     It   follows  that 
some  persons  in  the  house  are  not  men?/ 
Now  let  A  =  person  in  house, 

B  =  male, 
C  =  aged. 

By  enclosing  logical  symbols  in  brackets,  let  us  denote 
the  number  of  objects  belonging  to  the  class  indicated  by 
the  symbol.  Thus  let 

(A)  =  number  of  persons  in  house, 
(AB)  —  number  of  male  persons  in  house, 
(ABC)  =  number  of  aged  male  persons  in  house, 
and  so  on.     Now  if  we  use  w  and  w'  to  denote  unknown 
and  indefinite  numbers,  the  conditions  of  the  problem  may 
be    thus    stated    according    to    my  interpretation   of  the 
words — 

(AB)  =  (AC)  -w,  (i) 

that  is  to  say,  the  number  of  persons  in  the  house  who  are 
aged  is  at  least  equal  to,  and  may  exceed,  the  number  of 
male  persons  in  the  house  ; 

(ABc)  -  u/,  (2) 

that  is  to  say,  the  number  of  male  persons  in  the  house 
who  are  not  aged  is  some  unknown  positive  quantity. 

If  we  develop  the  terms  in  (i)  by  the  Law  of  Duality 
(pp.  87,  95,  97),  we  obtain 

(ABC)  +  (ABc)  =  (ABC)  +  (A6C)  -  w. 
Subtracting  the  common  term  (ABC)  from  each  side  and 
substituting  for  (ABc)  its  value  as  given  in  (2),  we  get  at 
once 

(A&C)  -  10  +  u/, 
and  adding  (Abe)  to  each  side,  we  have 

(Ab)  =  Abe  +  10  4  wf. 

The  meaning  of  this  result  is  that  the  number  of  persons 
in  the  house  who  are  not  men  is  at  least  equal  to  w  +  iu', 

S  'Syllabus  of  a  proposed  System  of  Logic,'  p.  29. 


192  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

and  exceeds  it  by  the  number  of  persons  in  the  house  who 
are  neither  men  nor  aged  (Abe). 

It  should  be  understood  that  this  solution  applies  only 
to  the  terms  of  the  example  quoted  above,  and  not  to  the 
general  problem  for  which  De  Morgan  intended  it  to  serve 
as  an  illustration. 

As  a  second  instance,  let  us  take  the  following  ques 
tion  : — The  whole  number  of  voters  in  a  borough  is  a ;  the 
number  against  whom  objections  have  been  lodged  by 
liberals  is  I;  and  the  number  against  whom  objections 
have  been  lodged  by  conservatives  is  c;  required  the 
number,  if  any,  who  have  been  objected  to  on  both  sides. 

Taking 

A  —  voter, 

B  =  objected  to  by  liberals, 

C  —  objected  to  by  conservatives, 

then  we  require  the  value  of  (ABC).  Now  the  following 
equation  in  identically  true— 

(ABC)  -  (AB)  +  (AC)  +  (A&c)  -  (A).       (i) 
For  if  we  develop  all  the  terms  on  the  second  side  we 
obtain 
(ABC)  -  (ABC)  +  (ABc)  +  (ABC)  +  (A&C)  +  (Abe) 

-  (ABC)  -  (ABc)  -  (A&C)  --  (Abe) ; 

and  striking  out  the  corresponding  positive  and  negative 
terms,  we  have  only  left  (ABC)  =  (ABC).  Since  then  (i)  is 
necessarily  true,  we  have  only  to  insert  the  known  values, 
and  we  have 

(ABC)  =  b  +  c  -  a  +  (Abe). 

Hence  the  number  who  have  received  objections  from  both 
sides  is  equal  to  the  excess,  if  any,  of  the  whole  number 
of  objections  over  the  number  of  voters  together  with  the 
numbers  of  voters  who  have  received  no  objections  (Abe). 

In  many  cases  classes  of  objects  may  exist  under  special 
logical  conditions,  and  we  must  consider  how  these  con 
ditions  must  be  interpreted  numerically. 


PRINCIPLES  OF  NUMBER.  193 

Every  logical  proposition  or  equation  now  gives  rise 
to  a  corresponding  numerical  equation.  Sameness  of 
qualities  occasions  sameness  of  numbers.  Hence  if 

A  =  B 

denotes  the  identity  of  the  qualities  of  A  and  B,  we  may 
conclude  that 

(A)  =  (B). 

It  is  evident  that  exactly  those  objects,  and  those  objects 
only,  which  are  comprehended  under  A  must  be  compre 
hended  under  B.  It  follows  that  wherever  we  can  draw 
an  equation  of  qualities,  we  can  draw  a  similar  equation  of 
numbers.  Thus,  from 

A  =  B  =  C 
we  infer 

A  =  C; 
and  similarly  from 

(A)  =  (B)  =  (C), 

meaning  the  numbers  of  A's  and  C's  are  equal  to  the 
number  of  B's,  we  can  infer 

(A)  =  (C). 

But,  curiously  enough,  this  does  not  apply  to  negative 
propositions  and  inequalities.  For  if 

A  =  B  -  D 

means  that  A  is  identical  with  B,  which  differs  from  D,  it 
does  not  follow  that 

(A)  =  (B)  ,  (D). 

Two  classes  of  objects  may  differ  in  qualities,  and  yet  they 
may  agree  in  number.  This  is  a  point  which  strongly 
confirms  me  in  the  opinion  I  have  already  expressed, 
that  all  inference  really  depends  upon  equations,  not 
differences  (p.  186). 

The  Logical  Abecedarium  thus  enables  us  to  make  a 
complete  analysis  of  any  numerical  problem,  and  though 
the  symbolical  statement  may  sometimes  seem  prolix,  I 
conceive  that  it  really  represents  the  course  which  the 

o 


194  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

mind  must  follow  in  solving  the  question.  Although 
thought  may  seem  to  outstrip  the  rapidity  with  which  the 
symbols  can  be  written  down,  yet  the  mind  does  not  really 
follow  a  different  course  from  that  indicated  by  the  sym 
bols.  For  a  fuller  explanation  of  this  natural  system  of 
Numerically  Definite  Reasoning,  with  more  abundant 
illustrations  and  an  analysis  of  De  Morgan's  Numerically 
Definite  Syllogism,  I  must  refer  the  reader  to  the  paper  in 
the  Memoirs  of  the  Manchester  Literary  and  Philosophical 
Society,  as  already  referred  to,  portions  of  which,  how 
ever,  have  been  embodied  in  the  present  section. 

The  reader  may  be  referred,  also,  to  Boole's  writings 
upon  the  subject  in  the  '  Laws  of  Thought,'  chap.  xix. 
p.  295,  and  in  a  paper  on  '  Propositions  Numerically  De 
finite,'  communicated  by  De  Morgan,  in  1868,  to  the 
Cambridge  Philosophical  Society,  and  printed  in  their 
'  Transactions/  vol.  xi.  part  ii.  Mr.  Alexander  J.  Ellis 
treats  the  same  subject  in  his  '  Contributions  to  Formal 
Logic,'  read  to  the  Royal  Society,  in  March,  1872,  but 
as  yet  published  only  in  the  form  of  a  brief  abstract,  in 
the  Proceedings  of  the  Society,  vol.  xx.  p.  307. 


CHAPTEE   IX. 

THE     VARIETY    OF    NATURE,     OR    THE     DOCTRINE     OF 
COMBINATIONS    AND    PERMUTATIONS. 

NATURE  may  be  said  to  be  evolved  from  the  monotony 
of  non-existence  by  the  creation  of  diversity.  It  is  plau 
sibly  asserted  that  we  are  conscious  only  so  far  as  we 
experience  difference.  Life  is  change,  and  perfectly  uni 
form  existence  would  be  no  better  than  non-existence. 
Certain  it  is  that  life  demands  incessant  novelty,  and  that 
nature  though  it  probably  never  fails  to  obey  the  same 
fixed  laws,  yet  presents  to  us  an  apparently  unlimited 
series  of  varied  combinations  of  events.  It  is  the  work  of 
science  to  observe  and  record  the  kinds  and  comparative 
numbers  of  such  combinations  of  phenomena,  occurring 
spontaneously  or  produced  by  our  interference.  Patient 
and  skilful  examination  of  the  records  may  then  disclose 
the  laws  imposed  on  matter  at  its  creation,  and  enable  us 
more  or  less  successfully  to  predict,  or  even  to  regulate, 
the  future  occurrence  of  any  particular  combination. 

The  Laws  of  Thought  are  the  first  and  most  important 
of  all  the  laws  which  govern  the  combinations  of  pheno 
mena  ;  and,  even  though  they  be  binding  on  the  rnind, 
they  may  also  be  regarded  as  verified  in  the  external 
world.  The  Logical  Abecedarium  develops  the  utmost 
variety  of  things  and  events  which  may  occur,  and  it 
is  evident  that  as  each  new  quality  is  introduced,  the 
number  of  combinations  is  doubled.  Thus  four  qualities 
may  occur  in  16  combinations;  five  qualities  in  32  ;  six 
qualities  in  64  ;  and  so  on.  In  general  language,  if  n  be- 

o  2 


196  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

the  number  of  qualities,  2n  is  the  number  of  varieties  of 
things  which  may  be  formed  from  them,  if  there  be  no  con 
ditions  but  those  of  logic.  This  number,  it  need  hardly 
be  said,  increases  after  the  first  few  terms,  in  an  extra 
ordinary  manner,  so  that  it  would  require  302  figures, 
even  to  express  the  number  of  combinations  in  which  1000 
qualities  might  conceivably  present  themselves. 

If  all  the  combinations  allowed  by  the  Laws  of  Thought 
occurred  in  nature,  then  science  would  begin  and  end  with 
those  laws.  To  observe  nature  would  give  us  no  ad 
ditional  knowledge,  because  no  two  qualities  would  in  the 
long  run  be  oftener  associated  than  any  other  two.  We 
could  never  predict  events  with  more  certainty  than  we 
now  predict  the  throws  of  dice,  and  experience  would  be 
without  use.  But  the  universe,  as  actually  created,  pre 
sents  a  far  different  and  much  more  interesting  problem. 
The  most  superficial  observation  shows  that  some  things 
are  habitually  associated  with  other  things.  The  more 
mature  our  examination,  the  more  we  become  convinced 
that  each  event  depends  upon  the  prior  occurrence  of 
some  other  series  of  events.  Action  and  reaction  are 
gradually  discovered  to  underlie  the  whole  scene,  and  an 
independent  or  casual  occurrence  does  not  exist  except  in 
appearance.  Even  dice  as  they  fall  are  surely  determined 
in  their  course  by  prior  conditions  and  fixed  laws.  Thus 
the  combinations  of  events  which  can  really  occur  are 
found  to  be  very  restricted,  and  it  is  the  work  of  science 
to  detect  these  restricting  conditions. 

In  the  English  alphabet,  for  instance,  we  have  twenty- 
six  letters.  Were  the  combinations  of  such  letters  per 
fectly  free,  so  that  any  letter  could  be  indifferently 
sounded  with  any  other,  the  number  of  words  which 
could  be  formed  without  any  repetition  would  be  226-  i, 
or  67,108,863,  equal  in  number  to  the  combinations  of 
the  twenty-seventh  column  of  the  Abecedarium,  excluding 


COMBINATIONS  AND  PERMUTATIONS.  197 

one  for  the  case  in  which  all  the  letters  would  be 
absent.  But  the  formation  of  our  vocal  organs  prevents 
our  using  the  far  greater  part  of  these  conjunctions  of 
letters.  At  least  one  vowel  must  be  present  in  each  word; 
more  than  two  consonants  cannot  usually  be  brought  to 
gether  ;  and  to  produce  words  capable  of  smooth  utterance 
a  number  of  other  rules  must  be  observed.  To  determine 
exactly  how  many  words  might  exist  in  the  English 
language  under  these  circumstances,  would  be  an  exceed 
ingly  complex  problem,  the  solution  of  which  has  never 
been  attempted.  The  number  of  existing  English  words 
may  perhaps  be  said  not  to  exceed  one  hundred  thousand, 
and  it  is  only  by  investigating  the  combinations  presented 
in  the  dictionary,  that  we  can  learn  the  Laws  of  Euphony 
or  calculate  the  possible  number.  In  this  example  we 
have  an  epitome  of  the  work  and  method  of  science.  The 
combinations  of  natural  phenomena  are  limited  by  a  great 
number  of  conditions  which  are  in  no  way  brought  to  our 
knowledge  except  so  far  as  they  are  disclosed  in  the  ex 
amination  of  nature. 

It  is  often  a  very  difficult  matter  to  determine  the 
numbers  of  permutations  or  combinations  which  may 
exist  under  various  restrictions.  Many  learned  men 
puzzled  themselves  in  former  centuries  over  what  were 
called  Protean  verses,  or  Latin  verses  admitting  many 
variations  in  accordance  with  the  Laws  of  Metre.  The 
most  celebrated  of  these  verses  was  that  invented  by 
Bernard  Bauhusius,  as  folio wsa: — 

|     'Tot  tibi  sunt  dotes,  Virgo,  quot  sidera  ccelo.' 

One  author,  Ericius  Puteanus,  filled  forty-eight  pages  of 
a  work  in  reckoning  up  its  possible  transpositions,  making 
them  only  1022.  Other  calculators  gave  2196,  3276,  2580 
as  their  results.  Dr.  Wallis  assigned  3096,  but  without 

a  Montucla,  '  Histoire,'  &c.,  vol.  iii.  p.  388. 


198  TEE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

much  confidence  in  the  accuracy  of  his  result.b  It  required 
the  skill  of  James  Bernouilli  to  decide  the  number  of 
transpositions  to  be  3312,  under  the  condition  that  the 
sense  and  metre  of  the  verse  shall  be  perfectly  preserved. 
In  approaching  the  consideration  of  the  great  Inductive 
problem,  it  is  very  necessary  that  we  should  acquire  correct 
notions  as  to  the  comparative  number  of  combinations 
which  may  exist  under  different  circumstances.  The 
doctrine  of  combinations  is  that  part  of  mathematical 
science  which  applies  numerical  calculation  to  determine 
the  number  of  combinations  under  various  conditions. 
It  is  a  part  of  the  science  which  really  lies  at  the  base 
not  only  of  other  sciences,  but  of  other  branches  of  mathe 
matical  science.  The  forms  of  algebraical  expressions  are 
determined  by  the  principles  of  combination,  and  Hinden- 
burg  recognised  this  fact  in  his  Combinatorial  Analysis. 
The  greatest  mathematicians  have,  during  the  last  three 
centuries,  given  their  best  powers  to  the  treatment  of 
this  subject ;  it  was  the  favourite  study  of  Pascal ;  it 
early  attracted  the  attention  of  Leibnitz,  who  wrote  his 
curious  essay,  De  Arte  Conibinatoria,  at  twenty  years 
of  age ;  James  Bernouilli,  one  of  the  very  profoundest 
mathematicians,  devoted  no  small  part  of  his  life  to  the 
investigation  of  the  subject  as  connected  with  that  of 
Probability  ;  and  in  his  celebrated  work,  De  Arte  Con- 
jectandi,  he  has  so  finely  described  the  importance  of 
the  doctrine  of  combinations,  that  I  need  offer  no  excuses 
for  quoting  his  remarks  at  full  length.  '  It  is  easy  to 
perceive  that  the  prodigious  variety  which  appears  both 
in  the -works  of  nature  and  in  the  actions  of  men,  and 
which  constitutes  the  greatest  part  of  the  beauty  of  the 
universe,  is  owing  to  the  multitude  of  different  ways 
in  which  its  several  parts  are  mixed  with,  or  placed 
near,  each  other.  But,  because  the  number  of  causes 

b  Wallis,  'Of  Combinations,'  &c.,  p.  119. 


COMBINATIONS  AND  PERMUTATIONS.  199 

that  concur  in  producing  a  given  event,  or  effect,  is 
oftentimes  so  immensely  great,  and  the  causes  them 
selves  are  so  different  one  from  another,  that  it  is  ex 
tremely  difficult  to  reckon  up  all  the  different  ways  in 
which  they  may  be  arranged  or  combined  together,  it 
often  happens  that  men,  even  of  the  best  understandings 
and  greatest  circumspection,  are  guilty  of  that  fault  in 
reasoning  which  the  writers  on  logic  call  the  insufficient 
or  imperfect  enumeration  of  parts  or  cases :  insomuch 
that  I  will  venture  to  assert,  that  this  is  the  chief,  and 
almost  the  only,  source  of  the  vast  number  of  erroneous 
opinions,  and  those  too  very  often  in  matters  of  great 
importance,  which  we  are  apt  to  form  on  all  the  subjects 
we  reflect  upon,  whether  they  relate  to  the  knowledge  of 
nature  or  the  merits  and  motives  of  human  actions.  It 
must  therefore  be  acknowledged,  that  that  art  which 
affords  a  cure  to  this  weakness,  or  defect,  of  our  under 
standings,  and  teaches  us  so  to  enumerate  all  the  possible 
ways  in  which  a  given  number  of  things  may  be  mixed 
and  combined  together,  that  we  may  be  certain  that  we 
have  not  omitted  any  one  arrangement  of  them  that  can 
lead  to  the  object  of  our  inquiry,  deserves  to  be  con 
sidered  as  most  eminently  useful  and  worthy  of  our 
highest  esteem  and  attention.  And  this  is  the  business 
of  the  art  or  doctrine  of  combinations.  Nor  is  this  art 
or  doctrine  to  be  considered  merely  as  a  branch  of  the 
mathematical  sciences.  For  it  has  a  relation  to  almost 
every  species  of  useful  knowledge  that  the  mind  of  man 
can  be  employed  upon.  It  proceeds  indeed  upon  mathe 
matical  principles,  in  calculating  the  number  of  the  com 
binations  of  the  things  proposed :  but  by  the  conclusions 
that  are  obtained  by  it,  the  sagacity  of  the  natural 
philosopher,  the  exactness  of  the  historian,  the  skill  and 
judgment  of  the  physician,  and  the  prudence  and  fore 
sight  of  the  politician  may  be  assisted ;  because  the  business 


200  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

of  all  these  important  profes  io^s  is  but  to  form  reasonable 
conjectures  concerning  the  several  objects  which  engage 
their  attention,  and  all  wise  conjectures  are  the  results  of 
a  just  and  careful  examination  of  the  several  different 
effects  that  may  possibly  arise  from  the  causes  that  are 
capable  of  producing  them.' c 

Distinction  of  Combinations  and  Permutations. 

We  must  at  once  consider  the  deep  difference  which 
exists  between  Combinations  and  Permutations ;  a  dif 
ference  involving  important  logical  principles,  and  in 
fluencing  the  form  of  all  our  mathematical  expressions. 
In  permutation  we  recognise  varieties  of  order  or  arrange 
ment,  treating  AB  as  a  different  group  from  BA.  In 
combination  we  take  notice  only  of  the  presence  or 
absence  of  a  certain  thing,  and  pay  no  regard  to  its 
place  in  order  of  time  or  space.  Thus  the  four  letters 
a,  e,  m,  n  can  form  but  one  combination,  but  they  occur 
in  language  in  several  permutations,  as  name,  amen, 
mean,  mane. 

We  have  hitherto  been  dealing  with  purely  logical 
questions,  involving  only  combination  of  qualities.  I  have 
fully  pointed  out  in  more  than  one  place  that,  though  our 
symbols  could  not  but  be  written  in  order  of  place  and 
read  in  order  of  time,  the  relations  expressed  had  no 
regard  to  place  or  time  (pp.  40,  131).  The  Law  of  Com- 
mutativeness,  in  fact,  expresses  the  condition  that  in  logic 
we  deal  with  combinations,  and  the  same  law  is  true 
of  all  the  processes  of  algebra.  In  nature  and  art,  order 
may  be  a  matter  of  indifference ;  it  makes  no  difference, 
for  instance,  whether  gunpowder  is  a  mixture  of  sulphur, 
carbon  and  nitre,  or  carbon,  nitre  and  sulphur,  or  nitre,  sul 
phur  and  carbon,  provided  that  the  substances  are  present  in 

c  James  Bernoulli!,  « De  Arte  Conjectandi,'  translated  by  Baron 
Maseres.  London,  1795,  pp.  35-36. 


COMBINATIONS  AND  PERMUTATIONS.  201 

proper  proportions  and  well  mixed.  But  this  indifference 
of  order  does  not  usually  extend  to  the  events  of  physical 
science  or  the  operations  of  art.  The  change  of  mechanical 
energy  into  heat  is  not  exactly  the  same  as  the  change 
from  heat  into  mechanical  energy ;  thunder  does  not  in 
differently  precede  and  follow  lightning  ;  it  is  a  matter  of 
some  importance  that  we  load,  cap,  present,  and  fire  a  rifle 
in  this  precise  order.  Time  is  the  condition  of  all  our 
thoughts,  space  of  all  our  actions,  and  therefore  both  in 
art  and  science  we  are  to  a  great  extent  concerned  with 
permutations.  All  language,  for  instance,  treats  different 
permutations  of  letters  as  having  different  meanings. 

Permutations  of  certain  things  are  far  more  numerous 
than  combinations  of  those  things,  for  the  obvious  reason 
that  each  distinct  thing  is  regarded  differently  according 
to  its  place.  Thus  the  letters  A,  B,  C,  will  make  different 
permutations  according  as  A  stands  first,  second,  or  third ; 
having  decided  the  place  of  A,  there  are  two  places 
between  which  we  may  choose  for  B ;  and  then  there 
remains  but  one  place  for  C.  Accordingly  the  permuta 
tions  of  these  letters  will  be  altogether  3  x  2  x  i  or  6  in 
number.  With  four  things  or  letters,  A,  B,  C,  D,  we 
shall  have  four  choices  of  place  for  the  first  letter,  three 
for  the  second,  two  for  the  third,  and  one  for  the  fourth, 
so  that  there  will  be  altogether  4  x  3  x  2  x  i,  or  24 
permutations.  The  same  simple  rule  applies  in  all  cases ; 
beginning  with  the  whole  number  of  things  we  multiply 
at  each  step  by  a  number  decreased  by  a  unit.  In  general 
language,  if  n  be  the  number  of  things  in  a  combination,  the 

number  of  permutations  is  n  (n  —  i)  (n  —  2) 4.3.2.  i. 

Thus,  if  we  were  to  re-arrange  the  names  of  the  days  of  the 
week,  the  possible  arrangements  out  of  which  we  should 
have  to  choose  the  new  order,  would  be  no  less  than 
7.6.5.4.3.2.  i,  or  5040,  or,  excluding  the  existing 
order,  5039. 


202 


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 


The  reader  will  see  that  the  numbers  which  we  reach  in 
questions  of  permutation,  increase  in  a  more  extraordinary 
manner  even  than  in  combination.  Each  new  object  or 
term  doubles  the  number  of  combinations  (p.  195),  but 
increases  the  permutations  by  a  factor  continually 
growing.  Instead  of2x2x2x2x  .....  we  have 
2x3x4x5x  .....  and  the  products  of  the  latter 
expression  indefinitely  exceed  those  of  the  former.  These 
products  of  continually  increasing  factors  are  constantly 
employed,  as  we  shall  see,  in  questions  both  of  permu 
tation  and  combination.  They  are  technically  called 
factorials,  that  is  to  say,  the  product  of  all  integer 
numbers,  from  unity  up  to  any  number  n,  is  the  factorial 
of  n,  and  is  often  indicated  symbolically  by  (_»*_.  I  give 
below  the  factorials  up  to  that  of  fifteen  :  — 

6=1.2.3 
24  =  i  .  2  .  3  .  4 
1  20  =  i  .  2  ....  5 
720  =  i  .  2  ....  6 
5,040  =  |_7_ 
40,320  =  I  A 
362,880  =  |_9_ 
3,628,800  =  |i° 
39,916,800  =  |rj. 

479,OOI,6OO   = 

6,227,020,800  = 

87,178,291,200  =  |£4 

1,307,674,368,000  =  |i5 

The  factorials  up  to  [36  are  given  in  Rees'  '  Cyclopaedia/ 
art.  Cipher,  and  the  logarithms  of  products  up  to  [265 
are  given  at  the  end  of  the  table  of  logarithms  published 
under  the  superintendence  of  the  Society  for  the  Diffusion 
of  Useful  Knowledge  (p.  215).  To  express  the  factorial 
I265  would  require  529  places  of  figures. 

Many  writers  have  from  time  to  time  remarked  upon 


12 


COMBINATIONS  AND  PERMUTATIONS.  203 

the  extraordinary  magnitude  of  the  numbers  with  which 
we  deal  in  this  subject.  Tacquet  calculated  d  that  the 
twenty-four  letters  of  the  alphabet  may  be  arranged  in 
more  than  620  thousand  trillions  of  orders ;  and  Schottus 
estimated e  that  if  a  thousand  millions  of  men  were  em 
ployed  for  the  same  number  of  years  in  writing  out  these 
arrangements,  and  each  man  filled  each  day  forty  pages 
with  forty  arrangements  in  each,  they  could  not  have  ac 
complished  the  task,  as  they  would  have  written  only  584 
thousand  trillions  instead  of  620  thousand  trillions. 

In  some  questions  the  number  of  permutations  may  be 
restricted  and  reduced  by  various  conditions.  Some 
tilings  in  a  group  may  be  undistinguishable  from  others, 
so  that  change  of  order  will  produce  no  difference.  Thus 
if  we  were  to  permutate  the  letters  of  the  name  Ann, 
according  to  our  previous  rule,  we  should  obtain  3x2x1, 
or  6  orders  ;  but  half  of  these  arrangements  would  be 
identical  with  the  other  half,  because  the  interchange  of 

o 

the  two  n's  has  no  effect.  The  really  different  orders  will 
therefore  be  ~^-~-  or  3,  namely  Ann,  Nan,  Nna.  In 

the  word  utility  there  are  two  i's  and  two  t's,  in  respect 
of  both  of  which  pairs  the  number  of  permutations  must 
be  halved.  Thus  we  obtain  — — •  5  •  4  •  3  •  2  •  r  or  I26o,  as 

I   .   2  .    I    .   2 

the  number  of  permutations.  The  simple  rule  evidently 
is  that  when  some  things  or  letters  are  undistinguished, 
proceed  in  the  first  place  to  calculate  all  the  possible 
permutations  as  if  all  were  different,  and  then  divide  by 
the  number  of  possible  permutations  of  those  series  of 
things  which  are  not  distinguished,  and  of  which  the 
permutations  have  therefore  been  counted  in  excess. 
Thus  since  the  word  Utilitarianism  contains  fourteen 

d    '  Aritlmieticse  Theoria.'  Ed.  Amsterd.  1704,  p.  517. 
e  Rees'  '  Cyclopaedia/  art.  Cipher. 


204  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

letters,  of  which  four  are  i's,  two  a's,  and  two  t'a,  the 
number  of  distinct  arrangements  will  be  found  by 
dividing  the  factorial  of  14,  by  the  factorials  of  4,  2, 
and  2,  the  result  being  908,107,200.  From  the  letters 
of  the  word  Mississippi  we  can  get  in  like  manner 

!= or  34,6 50  permutations,  or  not  one-thousandth 

[4.  X|_4_X|_2_ 

part  of  what  we  should  obtain  were  all  the  letters 
different. 

Calculation  of  Number  of  Combinations. 

Although  in  many  questions  both  of  art  and  science 
we  need  to  calculate  the  number  of  permutations  on 
account  of  their  own  interest,  it  far  more  frequently 
happens  in  scientific  subjects  that  they  possess  but  an 
indirect  interest.  As  I  have  already  pointed  out,  we 
almost  always  deal  in  the  logical  and  mathematical 
sciences  with  combinations,  and  variety  of  order  enters 
only  through  the  inherent  imperfections  of  our  symbols 
and  modes  of  calculation.  Signs  must  be  used  in  some 
order,  and  we  must  withdraw  our  attention  from  this  order 
before  the  signs  correctly  represent  the  relations  of  things 
which  exist  neither  before  nor  after  each  other.  Now,  it 
often  happens  that  we  cannot  choose  all  the  combinations 
of  things,  without  first  choosing  them  subject  to  the 
accidental  variety  of  order,  and  we  must  then  divide  by 
the  number  of  possible  variations  of  order,  that  we  may 
get  to  the  true  number  of  pure  combinations. 

Suppose  that  we  wish  to  determine  the  number  of 
ways  in  which  we  can  select  three  letters  out  of  the 
alphabet,  without  allowing  the  same  letter  to  be  repeated. 
At  the  first  choice  we  can  take  any  one  of  26  letters ;  at 
the  next  step  there  remain  25  letters,  any  one  of  which 
may  be  joined  with  that  already  taken  ;  at  the  third  step 
there  will  be  24  choices,  so  that  apparently  the  whole 


COMBINATIONS  AND  PERMUTATIONS.  205 

number  of  ways  of  choosing  is  26x25x2  4.  But  the  fact 
that  one  choice  succeeded  another  has  caused  us  to  obtain 
the  same  combinations  of  letters  in  different  orders ;  we 
should  get,  for  instance,  a,  p,  r  at  one  time,  and  p,  r,  a  at 
another,  and  every  three  distinct  letters  will  appear  six 
times  over,  because  three  things  can  be  arranged  in  six 
permutations.  Thus  the  true  number  of  combinations 

.,-,  ,      24  x  23  x  22 
will  be  -1-         — ,  or  2024. 
1x2x3 

It  is  apparent  that  we  need  the  doctrine  of  permuta 
tions  in  order  that  we  may  in  many  questions  counteract 
the  exaggerating  effect  of  successive  selection.  If  out  of 
a  senate  of  30  persons  we  have  to  choose  a  committee  of  5, 
we  may  choose  any  of  30  first,  any  of  29  next,  and  so  on, 
in  fact  there  will  be  30  x  29  x  28  x  27  x  26  selections ; 
but  as  the  actual  character  of  the  members  of  the  committee 
will  not  be  affected  by  the  accidental  order  of  their  selec 
tion,  we  divide  by  1x2x3x4x5,  and  the  possible  num 
ber  of  different  committees  will  be  142,506.  Similarly 
if  we  want  to  calculate  the  number  of  ways  in  which  the 
eight  major  planets  may  come  into  conjunction,  it  is  evi 
dent  that  they  may  meet  either  two  at  a  time  or  three  at 
a  time,  or  four  or  more  at  a  time,  and  as  nothing  is  said  as  to 
the  relative  order  or  place  in  the  conjunction,  we  require 
the  number  of  combinations.  Now  a  selection  of  2  out  of  8 

&  H  fi  h  f\ 

is  possible  in  —    or  28  ways  :    of    3    out    of  8    in    -J-^- 
1.2  •f  1.2.3 

or  56  ways ;   of  4  out  of  8  in  -— -—  or  70  ways ;  and  it 

may  be  similarly  shown  that  for  5,  6,  7,  and  8  planets, 
meeting  at  one  time,  the  number  of  ways  is  56,  28,  8 
and  i.  Thus  we  have  solved  the  whole  question  of  the 
variety  of  conjunctions  of  eight  planets;  and  adding  all  the 
numbers  together,  we  find  that  247  is  the  utmost  possible 
number  of  modes  of  meeting. 

In  general  algebraic  language,  we  may  say  that  a  group 


206  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

of  m  things  may  be  chosen  out  of  a  total  number  of  n 
things,  in  a  number  of  combinations  denoted  by  the  formula 

n.(n-i)  (n-2)  (n-%)  ....  (n-m+i) 
1.2     .     3     .4      ....        m 

The  extreme  importance  and  significance  of  this  formula 
seems  to  have  been  first  adequately  recognised  by  Pascal, 
although  its  discovery  is  attributed  by  him  to  a  friend, 
M.  de  Ganieres/  We  shall  find  it  perpetually  recurring 
in  questions  both  of  combinations  and  probability,  and 
throughout  the  formulae  of  mathematical  analysis  traces  of 
its  influence  will  be  noticed. 

The  Arithmetical  Triangle. 

The  Arithmetical  Triangle  is  a  name  long  since  given  to 
a  series  of  remarkable  numbers  connected  with  the  subject 
we  are  treating.  According  to  Montucla  K  '  this  triangle  is 
in  the  theory  of  combinations  and  changes  of  order,  almost 
what  the  table  of  Pythagoras  is  in  ordinary  arithmetic, 
that  is  to  say,  it  places  at  once  under  the  eyes,  the  numbers 
required  in  a  multitude  of  cases  of  this  theory.'  As  early 
as  1544  Stifels  had  noticed  the  remarkable  properties  of 
these  numbers  and  the  mode  of  their  evolution.11  Briggs, 
the  inventor  of  the  common  system  of  logarithms,  was  so 
struck  with  their  importance  that  he  called  them  the 
Abacus  Panchrestus.  Pascal,  however,  was  the  first  who 
wrote  a  distinct  treatise  on  these  numbers,  and  gave  them 
the  name  by  which  they  are  still  known.  But  Pascal  did 
not  by  any  means  exhaust  the  subject,  and  it  remained  for 
James  Bernouilli  to  demonstrate  fully  the  importance  of 
the  figurate  numbers,  as  they  are  also  called.  In  his 
treatise  De  Arte  Conjectandi,  he  points  out  their  appli- 

f  '  CEuvres  Completes  de  Pascal'  (1865),  vol.  iii.  p.  302.  Montucla  states 
the  name  as  De  Gruieres,  'Histoire  cles  Math^matiques/  vol.  iii.  p.  389. 

g  'Histoire  des  Mathe'matiques/  vol.  iii.  p.  387. 

h  Leslie,  '  Dissertation  on  the  Progress  of  Mathematical  and  Physical 
Science,'  Encyclopaedia  Britannica. 


COMBINATIONS  AND  PERMUTATIONS.  207 

cation  in  the  theory  of  combinations  and  probabilities,  and 
remarks  of  the  Arithmetical  Triangle, '  It  not  only  contains 
the  clue  to  the  mysterious  doctrine  of  combinations,  but  it 
is  also  the  ground  or  foundation  of  most  of  the  important 
and  abstruse  discoveries  that  have  been  made  in  the  other 
branches  of  the  mathematics/ l 

The  numbers  of  the  triangle  can  be  calculated  in  a  very 
easy  manner  by  successive  additions.  We  commence  with 
unity  at  the  apex ;  in  the  next  line  we  place  a  second 
unit  to  the  right  of  this  ;  to  obtain  the  third  line  of 
figures  we  move  the  previous  line  one  place  to  the  right, 
and  add  them  to  the  same  figures  as  they  were  before 
removal,  and  we  can  then  repeat  the  same  process  ad 
infinitum.  The  fourth  line  of  figures,  for  instance,  con 
tains  i,  3,  3,  i  ;  moving  them  one  place  and  adding  as 
directed  we  obtain  : — 

Fourth  line  . 
Fifth  line  .  . 
Sixth  line  .  . 

Seventh  line.  .  .     i     6     15     20     15     6     i 

Carrying  out  this  simple  process  through  ten  more  steps 
we  obtain  the  first  seventeen  lines  of  the  Arithmetical 
Triangle  as  printed  on  the  next  page.  Theoretically 
speaking  the  Triangle  must  be  regarded  as  infinite  in 
extent  but  the  numbers  increase  so  rapidly  that  it  soon 
becomes  almost  impracticable  to  continue  the  table.  The 
longest  table  of  the  numbers  which  I  have  found  is  given 
in  Fortia's  '  Traitd  des  Progressions '  (p.  80),  where  they 
are  given  up  to  the  fortieth  line  and  the  ninth  column. 

»  Bernouilli,  '  De  Arte  Conjectandi,'  translated  by  Francis  Maseres, 
London,  1795,  p.  75. 


I 

3 

3 

i 

i 

3 

3 

i 

I 

4 

6 

4 

i 

i 

4 

6 

4 

i 

I 

5 

10 

10 

5 

i 

i 

5 

10 

10 

5 

208 


THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 


THE  ARITHMETICAL  TRIANGLE. 

;h  Column. 
Twelfth  Column. 

Thirteenth  Column. 

Fourteenth  Column. 

Fifteenth  Column. 

'o 
.  0 

ii 

1  § 

"  « 
0  -g 

5  > 

gcg        M 
fj 

.^        HI    VO 

02            HI 

M     TO    O 

HI      M 

HI 

HI 

Tj-    IO     O 
HI      O    VO 
M     IO 

M 

CO 

HI 

HI     XO    O 

ON  to  PI 

HI 

H 

HI 

00 

Tj"  IO  00 

vo  vo  VO 

co  co  co 

HI      •^~ 

p.       S        M 

"o   _ 

M 
HI 

VO 
VO 

vo 

oo 

HI   cooo 
O    0    O 
0    O    0 

HI     COOO 

2  -  ° 
«  1     M 
II 

10 
IO 

O 

IO 

M 

N    TO    O 

o  o  -*• 

O    O    M- 

N    XO  M 

HI 

o  ~ 
.         HI  ON  vra  10  vo  *— 

e  :g             "*'vo   c*00 
a    a                 HI  •<*•  N 

11 

co  to  o 

O     CO  !>• 

O    "i-OO 

COVO     N 
HI 

pi  ^a    M  oo  ^o   o 

Is        Ms 

"3    ta 

o  S 

,rj  ...  ,  

0 

CO 

co 

(M 

CN 

— 

HI 

N     IO   O 

co  co  Tt- 
•<*••*  -4- 

COVO     HI 

HI 

fl     O      M    t^OO     •*   O 

15           NGO  S 

S    a>                            N 
1* 

N 

vo 

T*- 

^> 

ON 

vo 

HI 

CO  IOOO 

o  o  o 

o  o  o 

CO  IOOO 

o  •-  •  — 

a   -d     HI  vo    IH  vo  vo    N    N 

§    S3                       N    IO    N    U5VO 
HI     (N     -«J- 

d  3  * 

M 

0> 
.t- 

00 

HI 

M     COOO 
O    O  vo 
O    O    CO 
N     CO   •*• 

'S     •£                         M      CO  0>>    M      HI 

d^B 

o 

CO 
CO 

ON 

M 

HI     10    O 
O   VO     N 

o   cooo 

HI      HI      HI 

.33      HI    -^-  O    O    TOVO     Th  O 

ti  "$    o              MNcotoooM 

S  0  ^                                       "H 

IO 
vo 

HI 

0 

M 

vc 

oo 

(N 

M-  10  O 

VO    VOVO 

co  ^"  10 

a  r§  .is    w  covo  o  10  IH  oo  VD  m  iovo 

M     HI     N     N     CO   -*•   XOVO 
1    ^H 

00 

r^ 

HI     IO    O 

ON  O    N 

HI      HI 

^     «     w    N    CO  -<t-  IOVO   t^OO    O\  O 

HI 

n 

co 

ThXOVO 

£ 

IS 

9UFT  M    M    co-«*'tOvo    i>-OO    ONO    « 

N 

M 

CO 

M 

•<*• 

M 

TT5VO    J>» 
M    M    M 

COM  BIN  A  TIONS  A  ND  PERM  UTA  TIONS.  209 

On  carefully  examining  these  numbers,  we  shall  find 
that  they  are  connected  with  each  other  by  an  almost 
unlimited  series  of  relations,  a  few  of  the  more  simple 
of  which  may  be  noticed. 

1.  Each   vertical  column   of  numbers   exactly   corre 
sponds  with  an  oblique    series  descending   from    left  to 
right,  so  that  the  triangle  is  perfectly  symmetrical  in  its 
contents. 

2.  The  first  column  contains  only  units;   the  second 
column  contains  the  natural  numbers,    i,   2,  3,  &c. ;    the 
third  column  contains   a  remarkable   series  of  numbers, 
i,  3,  6,  10,  15,  &c.,  which  have  long  been  called  the  tri 
angular     numbers,   because    they    correspond   with    the 
numbers  of  balls  which  may  be  arranged  in  a  triangular 
form,  thus — 

o 

O  00 

o         o  o         o  o  o 
o       oo       ooo       oooo 
o      oo      ooo      oooo      ooooo 

These  numbers  evidently  differ  each  from  the  previous 
one  by  the  series  of  natural  numbers.  Their  employment 
has  been  explained,  and  the  first  20,000  of  the  numbers 
calculated  and  printed  by  E.  de  Joncourt  in  a  small 
quarto  volume,  which  was  published  at  the  Hague,  in 
1762. 

The  fourth  column  contains  the  pyramidal  numbers, 
so  called  because  they  correspond  to  the  number  of  equal 
balls  which  can  be  piled  in  regular  triangular  pyramids. 
Their  differences  are  the  triangular  numbers. 

The  numbers  of  the  fifth  column  have  the  pyramidal 
numbers  for  their  differences,  but  as  there  is  no  regular 
figure  of  which  they  express  the  contents,  they  have  been 
arbitrarily  called  the  trianguli-triangular  numbers.  The 
succeeding  columns  have,  in  a  similar  manner,  been  said  to 

p 


210  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

contain  the  tria ngul i-pyr  amidol,  the  pyramidi-pyramidal 
numbers,  and  so  on.k 

3.  From  the  mode  of  formation  of  the  table,  it  follows 
that  the  differences  of  the  numbers  in  each  column  will 
be  found  in  the  preceding    column  to  the  left.      Hence 
the  second  differences,  or  the  differences  of  differences  will 
be  in  the  second  column  to  the  left  of  any  given  column, 
the    third  differences    in    the    third   column,   and   so    on. 
Thus  we  may  say  that  unity  which  appears  in  the  first 
column    is   the  first    difference   of  the   numbers  in  the 
second  column ;  the  second  difference  of  those  in  the  third 
column ;    the  third   difference   of    those   in   the   fourth, 
and  so  on.     The  triangle  is  thus  seen  to  be  a  complete 
classification  of  all  numbers  according  as  they  have  unity 
for  any  of  their  differences. 

4.  Every  number  in  the  table  is  equal  to  the  sum  of 
the  numbers  which  stand  higher  in  the  next  column  to 
the  left,  beginning  with  the  next  line  above ;  thus  84  is 
equal  to  the  sum  of  28,  21,  15,  10,  6,  3,  i. 

5.  Since  each  line  is  formed  by  adding  the  previous 
line  to  itself,  it  is  evident  that  the  sum  of  the  numbers 
in  each  horizontal   line  must  be  double  that  of  the  line 
next  above.     Hence  we  know,  without  making  any  ad 
ditions,  that  the  successive  sums  must  be  i,  2,  4,  8,  16, 
32,  64,  &c.,  the  same  as  the  numbers  of  combinations  in 
the  Logical  Abecedarium.     Speaking  generally,  the  sum 
of  the  numbers  in  the  nth  line  will  be  2""1. 

6.  If  the  whole  of  the  numbers  down  to  any  line  be 
added  together,  we  shall  obtain  a  number  less  by  unity 
than  some  power  of  2  ;    thus,   the  first  line  gives   i   or 
21—  i  ;  the  first  two  lines  give  3  or  22—  i  ;  the  first  three 
lines  7  or  2s— i  ;    the  first  six  lines  give  63  or   26  — i  ; 
or,  speaking  in   general  language,   the   sum   of  the  first 
?i  lines  is  2"—  i. 

k  Wallis's  'Algebra,'  Discourse  of  Combinations,  &c.  p.  109. 


COMBINATIONS  AND  PERMUTATIONS.  211 

7.  It  follows  that  the  sum  of  the  numbers  in  any  one 
line  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  those  in  all  the  preceding  lines 
diminished  by  a  unit.  For  the  sum  of  the  nth  line  is,  as 
already  shewn,  2n~1,  and  the  sum  of  the  first  n  —  i  lines 
is  2n~l—  i,  or  less  by  a  unit. 

This  enumeration  of  the  properties  of  the  figurate 
numbers  does  not  approach  completeness ;  a  considerable, 
perhaps  an  unlimited,  number  of  less  simple  and  obvious 
relations  might  be  traced  out.  Pascal,  after  giving  many 
of  the  properties,  exclaims1  :  '  Mais  j'en  laisse  bien  plus 
que  je  n'en  donne  ;  c'est  ime  chose  etrange  combien  il  est 
fertile  en  proprietes !  Chacun  peut  s'y  exercer/  The 
arithmetical  triangle  may  be  considered  a  natural  classifi 
cation  of  numbers,  exhibiting,  in  the  most  complete 
manner,  their  evolution  and  relations  in  a  certain  point 
of  view.  It  is  obvious  that  in  an  unlimited  extension  of 
the  triangle,  each  number  will  have  at  least  two  places. 

Though  the  properties  above  explained  are  highly 
curious,  the  greatest  value  of  the  triangle  arises  from  the 
fact  that  it  contains  a  complete  statement  of  the  values 
of  the  formula  (p.  206),  for  the  number  of  combinations 
of  m  things  out  of  n,  for  all  possible  values  of  m  and  n. 
Out  of  seven  things  one  may  be  chosen  in  seven  ways, 
and  seven  occurs  in  the  eighth  line  of  the  second  column. 
The  combinations  of  two  things  chosen  out  of  seven 

7x6 

are  - — -  or    21,  which  is  the  third  number  in  the  eighth 

line.     The  combinations  of  three  things  out   of  seven  are 

^  x  6  x  i" 

3-  or  35,   which  appears  fourth  in   the  eighth  line. 
1x2x3 

In  a  similar  manner,  in  the  fifth,  sixth,  seventh,  and  eighth 
columns  of  the  eighth  line  I  find  it  stated  in  how  many 
ways  I  can  select  combinations  of  4,  5,  6,  and  7  things 
out  of  7.  Proceeding  to  the  ninth  line,  I  find  in  succession 

1  '  (Euvres  Completes,'  vol.  iii.  p.   251. 
1'    2 


212  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 


the  number  of  ways  in  which  I  can  select  i,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6, 
7,  and  8  things,  out  of  8  things.  In  general  language,  if 
I  wish  to  know  in  how  many  ways  m  things  can  be 
selected  in  combinations  out  of  n  things,  I  must  look 
in  the  n  +  Ith  line,  and  take  the  m  +  ith  number,  counting 
from  the  left,  as  the  answer.  In  how  many  ways,  for 
instance,  can  a  sub-committee  of  five  be  chosen  out  of  a 
committee  of  nine.  The  answer  is  126,  and  is  the  sixth 
number  in  the  tenth  line ;  it  will  be  found  equal  to 

— ,  which  our  previous  formula  (p.  206)  would 


7.6 


1.2.3.4.5 
give. 

The  full  utility  of  the  figurate  numbers  will  be  more 
apparent  when  we  reach  the  subject  of  probabilities,  but  I 
may  give  an  illustration  or  two  in  this  place.  In  how 
many  ways  can  we  arrange  four  pennies  as  regards  head 
and  tail  1  The  question  amounts  to  asking  in  how 
many  ways  we  can  select  o,  i,  2,  3,  or  4  heads  out  of  4 
heads,  and  the  fiftli  line  of  the  triangle  gives  us  the 
complete  answer,  thus— 

We  can  select  No  head  and  4  tails  in  i  way. 
„  i  •  head  and  3  tails  in  4  ways. 

„  2  heads  and  2  tails  in  6  ways. 

„  3  heads  and  i  tail  in  4  ways. 

„  4  heads  and  o  tail  in    i  way. 

The  total  number  of  different  cases  is  16,  or  24,  and 
when  we  come  to  the  next  chapter,  it  will  be  found  that 
these  numbers  give  us  the  respective  probabilities  of  all 
throws  with  four  pennies. 

I  gave  in  p.  205  a  calculation  of  the  number  of  ways  in 
which  eight  planets  can  meet  in  conjunction  ;  the  reader 
will  find  all  the  numbers  detailed  in  the  ninth  line  of  the 
arithmetical  triangle.  The  sum  of  the  whole  line  is  28  or 
256  ;  but  we  must  subtract  a  unit  for  the  case  where  no 
planet  appears,  and  8  for  the  8  cases  in  which  only  one 


COMBINATIONS  AND  PERMUTATIONS.  213 

planet  appears  ;  so  that  the  total  variety  of  conjunctions  is 

28—  i  _g  or  247. 

If  an  organ  has  twelve  stops,  we  find  in  the  thirteenth 
line  the    numbers  of  combinations  which  we  can  draw, 

0,  i,  2,  3,  &c.,  at  a  time;  the  total  number  of  modes  of 
varying  the  sound  is  no  less  than  212—  i  or  4095  m.     If  a 
number  be  the  product  of  n  prime  factors,  we  find  in  the 
n+  Ith  line  the  numbers  of  divisors,  being  the  product  of 

1,  2,  3,  or  more  of  the  prime    factors  ;    and   the  whole 
number   of  divisors   of  tli3   number    is    the   sum   of  the 
numbers  in  the  line,  subtracting  unity,  or  2"—  i. 

One  of  the  most  important  scientific  uses  of  the  arith 
metical  triangle,  consists  in  the  information  which  it  gives 
concerning  the  comparative  frequency  of  divergencies  from 
an  average.  Suppose,  for  the  mere  sake  of  argument, 
that  all  persons  were  naturally  of  equal  stature  of  five 
feet,  but  enjoyed  during  youth  seven  independent  chances 
of  growing  one  inch  in  addition.  Of  these  seven  chances, 
one,  two,  three,  or  more,  may  happen  favourably  to  any 
individual,  but  as  it  does  not  matter  what  the  chances 
are,  so  that  the  inch  is  gained,  the  question  really  turns 
upon  the  number  of  combinations  of  o,  i,  2,  3,  &c., 
things  out  of  seven.  Hence  the  eighth  line  of  the  triangle 
give  us  a  complete  answer  to  the  question,  as  follows  :— 
Out  of  every  128  people- 
Feet.  Inches. 

One  person  would  have  the  stature  of     5       o 

7  persons  „  ,,  51 

21  persons  „  „  52 

35  persons  „  „  53 

35  persons  „  „  54 

21  persons  „  „  5       5 

7  persons  „  „  56 

i   person  „  „  57 

m  Bernoulli!,  'De  Arte  Conjectandi,'  trans,  by  Mascrcs,  p.  64. 


214  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

By  taking  a  proper  line  of  the  triangle,  an  answer 
may  be  had  under  any  more  natural  supposition.  This 
theory  of  comparative  frequency  of  divergence  from  an 
average,  was  first  adequately  noticed  by  M.  Quetelet,  and 
has  lately  been  employed  in  a  very  interesting  and  bold 
manner  by  Mr.  Galton,  in  his  work  on  '  Hereditary  Genius/ 
We  shall  afterwards  find  that  the  theory  of  error,  to  which 
is  made  the  ultimate  appeal  in  cases  of  quantitative  in 
vestigation,  is  founded  upon  the  comparative  numbers  of 
combinations  as  displayed  in  the  triangle. 


Connection  between  the  Arithmetical  Triangle  and  the 
Logical  Abecedarium. 

There  exists  a  close  connection  between  the  arith 
metical  triangle  described  in  the  last  section,  and  the 
series  of  combinations  of  letters  called  the  Logical  Abece- 
darium.  The  one  is  to  mathematical  science  what  the 
other  is  to  logical  science.  In  fact  the  figurate  numbers, 
or  those  exhibited  in  the  triangle,  are  obtained  by 
summing  up  the  logical  combinations.  Accordingly,  just 
as  the  total  of  the  numbers  in  each  line  of  the  triangle 
was  twice  as  great  as  that  for  the  preceding  line  (p.  210), 
so  each  column  of  the  Abecedarium  (p.  109)  contained 
twice  as  many  combinations  as  the  preceding  one.  The 
like  correspondence  would  also  exist  between  the  sums 
of  all  the  lines  of  figures  down  to  any  particular  line,  and 
of  the  combinations  down  to  any  particular  column. 

By  examining  any  one  column  of  the  Abecedarium,  we 
shall  also  find  that  the  combinations  naturally  group 
themselves  according  to  the  figurate  numbers.  Take  the 
combinations  of  the  letters  A,  B,  C,  D  ;  they  consist  of 
all  the  ways  in  which  I  can  choose  four,  three,  two,  one, 
or  none  of  the  four  letters,  filling  up  the  vacant  spaces 


COMBINATIONS  AND  PERMUTATIONS. 


215 


with  negative  terms.     I  may  arrange  the  combinations  as 
follows  : — 

ABCD  .     Four  out  of  four    .  .     i  combination. 
ABCc/ 

-    Three  out  of  four  .        4  combinations. 
A5CD 

aBCD 


•    Two  out  of  four    .  .     6  combinations. 


aECd 
aBcD 
a&CD 


>    One  out  of  four  ...     4  combinations. 

J 
abed  None  out  of  four  .  .     i  combination. 


The  numbers,  it  will  be  noticed,  are  exactly  the  same 
as  those  in  the  fifth  line  of  the  arithmetical  triangle,  and 
an  exactly  similar  correspondence  would  be  found  to 
exist  in  the  case  of  each  other  column  of  the  Abece- 
darium. 

Numerical  abstraction,  it  has  been  asserted,  consists  in 
overlooking  the  kind  of  difference,  and  retaining  only  a 
consciousness  of  its  existence  (p.  177).  While  in  logic, 
then,  we  have  to  deal  with  each  combination  as  a  separate 
kind  of  thing,  in  arithmetic  we  can  distinguish  only  the 
classes  which  depend  upon  more  or  less  positive  terms 
being  present,  and  the  numbers  of  these  classes  imme 
diately  produce  the  numbers  of  the  arithmetical  triangle. 

It  may  here  be  pointed  out  that  there  are  two  modes 


216  THE  PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

in  which  we  can  calculate  the  whole  number  of  com 
binations  of  certain  things.  Either  we  may  take  the 
whole  number  at  once  as  shown  in  the  Abecedarium,  in 
which  case  the  number  will  be  some  power  of  two,  or 
else  we  may  calculate  successively,  by  aid  of  permutations, 
the  number  of  combinations  of  none,  one,  two,  three,  and 
so  on.  Hence  we  arrive  at  a  necessary  identity  between 
two  series  of  numbers.  In  the  case  of  four  things  we 
shall  have 

24  =  i   +  -  +  4  '  3  +  4  •  3  •  2  +  4  -3-2.1 

I  1.2  1.2.3  I   .   2  '.  3  .  4' 

In  a  general  form  of  expression  we  shall  have 

n                  n        n  .  (n—i)        n  (n-i\  (n—z\ 
2     =i+-  +  -  /  4.   — 1 LL  _J-  +  &e 

I  1.2  1.2-3 

the  terms  being  continued  until  they  cease  to  have  any 
value.  Thus  we  have  arrived  at  a  proof  of  simple  cases 
of  the  Binomial  Theorem,  of  which  each  column  of  the 
Abecedarium  is  an  exemplification.  It  may  be  shown 
that  all  other  mathematical  expansions  likewise  arise  out 
of  simple  processes  of  combination,  but  the  more  complete 
consideration  of  this  subject  must  be  deferred. 

Possible   Variety  of  Nature  and  Art. 

We  cannot  adequately  understand  the  difficulties  which 
beset  us  in  certain  branches  of  science,  unless  we  gain 
a  clear  idea  of  the  vast  number  of  combinations  or  per 
mutations  which  may  be  possible  under  certain  conditions. 
Thus  only  can  we  learn  how  hopeless  it  would  be  to 
attempt  to  treat  nature  in  detail,  and  exhaust  the  whole 
number  of  events  which  might  arise.  It  is  instructive  to 
consider,  in  the  first  place,  how  immensely  great  are  the 
numbers  of  combinations  with  which  we  deal  in  many 
arts  and  amusements. 


COMBINATIONS  AND  PERMUTATIONS.  217 


In  dealing  a  pack  of  cards,  the    number  of  hands,  of 
thirteen  cards  each,  which  can  be  produced  is 


52  .  51  •  50    .....    40 


or  635,013,559,600.  But  in  whist  four  hands  are  simul 
taneously  held,  and  the  number  of  distinct  deals  becomes 
so  vast  that  it  would  require  twenty-eight  figures  to  express 
it.  If  the  whole  population  of  the  world,  say  one  hundred 
thousand  millions  of  persons,  were  to  deal  cards  day  and 
night,  for  a  hundred  million  of  years,  they  would  not  in 
that  time  have  exhausted  one  hundred-thousandth  part  of 
the  possible  deals.0  Now,  even  with  the  same  hands  the 
play  may  be  almost  infinitely  varied,  so  that  the  complete 
variety  of  games  which  may  exist  is  almost  incalculably 
great.  It  is  in  the  highest  degree  improbable  that  any 
one  game  of  whist  was  ever  exactly  like  another,  except 
by  intention. 

The  end  of  novelty  in  art  might  well  be  dreaded,  did 
we  not  find  that  nature  at  least  has  placed  no  attainable 
limit,  and  that  the  deficiency  will  lie  in  our  inventive 
faculties.  It  would  be  a  cheerless  time  indeed  when  all 
possible  varieties  of  melody  were  exhausted,  but  it  is 
readily  shown  that  if  a  peal  of  twenty-four  bells  had  been 
rung  continuously  from  the  so-called  beginning  of  the 
world  to  the  present  day,  no  approach  could  have  been 
made  to  the  completion  of  the  possible  changes..  Nay, 
had  every  single  minute,  been  prolonged  to  10,000  years, 
still  the  task  would  have  been  unaccomplished. P  As 
regards  ordinary  melodies,  the  eight  notes  of  a  single 
octave  give  more  than  40,000  permutations,  and  two 
octaves  more  than  a  million  millions.  If  we  were  to  take 

0  '  Essay  on  Probability/  by  Lubbock  and  Drinkwater,  Useful  Know 
ledge  Society,  1833,  p.  6. 

P  Wallis  '  Of  Combinations,'  p.  116,  quoting  Vossius. 


218  THE  PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

into  account  the  semitones,  it  would  become  apparent  that 
it  is  practically  impossible  to  exhaust  the  variety  of 
music. 

Similar  considerations  apply  to  the  possible  number 
of  natural  substances,  though  we  cannot  always  give 
precisely  numerical  results.  It  was  recommended  by 
Hatchett^  that  a  systematic  examination  of  all  alloys 
of  metals  should  be  carried  out,  proceeding  from  the 
most  simple  binary  ones  to  more  complicated  ternary 
or  quaternary  ones.  He  can  hardly  have  been  aware 
of  the  extent  of  his  proposed  inquiry.  If  we  operated 
only  upon  thirty  of  the  known  metals,  the  number  of 
possible  selections  of  binary  alloys  would  be  435,  of 
ternary  alloys  4060,  of  quaternary  27,405,  without 
paying  any  regard  to  the  varying  proportions  of  the 
metals,  and  only  regarding  the  kind  of  metal.  If  we 
varied  all  the  ternary  alloys  by  quantities  not  less  than 
one  per  cent.,  the  number  of  these  alloys  only  would 
be  11,445,060.  An  exhaustive  investigation  of  the  sub 
ject  is  therefore  out  of  the  question,  and  unless  some 
laws  connecting  the  properties  of  the  alloy  and  its 
components  can  be  discovered,  it  is  not  apparent  how 
our  knowledge  of  them  can  be  ever  more  than  most 
incomplete. 

The  possible  variety  of  definite  chemical  compounds, 
again,  is  enormouslv  great.  Chemists  have  already  ex 
amined  many  thousands  of  inorganic  substances,  and  a 
still  greater  number  of  organic  •  compounds  ; r  they  have 
nevertheless  made  no  appreciable  impression  on  the 
number  which  may  exist.  Taking  the  number  of  ele 
ments  at  sixty- one,  the  number  of  compounds  contain 
ing  different  selections  of  four  elements  each  would 
be  more  than  half  a  million  (521,855).  As  the  same 

i  'Philosophical  Transactions'  (1803),  vol.  xciii.  p.  193. 
r  Hofmann's  '  Introduction  to  Chemistry,'  p.  36. 


COM  BIN  A  TIONS  A  ND  PERM  VTA  TIOXS.  2 1 9 

elements  often  combine  in  many  different  proportions, 
and  some  of  them,  especially  carbon,  have  the  power  of 
forming  an  almost  endless  number  of  compounds,  it 
would  hardly  be  possible  to  assign  any  limit  to  the 
number  of  chemical  compounds  which  may  be  formed. 
There  are  branches  of  physical  science,  therefore,  of  which 
it  is  unlikely  that  scientific  men,  with  all  their  industry, 
can  ever  obtain  a  knowledge  in  any  appreciable  degree 
approaching  to  completeness. 

Higher  Orders  of  Variety. 

The  consideration  of  the  facts  already  given  in  this 
chapter  will  not  produce  an  adequate  notion  of  the  pos 
sible  variety  of  existence,  unless  we  consider  the  com 
parative  numbers  of  combinations  of  different  orders.  By 
a  combination  of  a  higher  order,  I  mean  a  combination 
of  groups,  which  are  themselves  combinations  of  simpler 
groups.  The  almost  unlimited  number  of  compounds 
of  carbon,  hydrogen,  and  oxygen,  described  in  organic 
chemistry,  are  combinations  of  a  second  order,  for  the 
atoms  are  groups  of  groups.  The  wave  of  sound  pro 
duced  by  a  musical  instrument  may  be  regarded  as  a 
combination  of  motions  ;  the  body  of  sound  proceeding 
from  a  large  orchestra  is  therefore  a  complex  aggregate 
of  sounds  each  in  itself  a  complex  combination  of  move 
ments.  All  literature  may  be  said  to  be  developed 
out  of  the  difference  of  white  paper  and  black  ink. 
From  the  almost  unlimited  number  of  marks  which 
might  be  chosen  we  select  twenty-six  customary  letters. 
The  pronounceable  combinations  of  letters  are  probably 
some  trillions  in  number.  Now,  as  a  sentence  is  a  cer 
tain  selection  of  words,  the  possible  sentences  must  be 
indefinitely  more  numerous  than  the  words  of  which 
it  may  be  composed.  A  book  is  a  combination  of 


220  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

sentences,  and  a  library  is  a  combination  of  books.  A 
library,  therefore,  is  a  combination  of  the  fifth  order,  and 
the  powers  of  numerical  expression  would  be  almost 
exhausted  in  attempting  to  express  the  number  of  dis 
tinct  libraries  which  might  be  constructed.  The  calcu 
lation  would  not  be  possible,  because  the  union  of  letters 
in  words,  of  words  in  sentences,  and  of  sentences  in  books, 
are  governed  by  conditions  so'  complex  as  to  defy  calcu 
lation.  I  wish  only  to  point  out  that  there  is  no  limit 
to  the  multitude  of  different  sentences  which  may  be  de 
veloped  out  of  the  one  difference  of  ink  and  paper.  Galileo 
is  said  to  have  remarked  that  all  truth  is  contained  in 
the  compass  of  the  alphabet.  We  might  add  that  it  is  all 
contained  in  the  difference  of  ink  and  paper. 

One  consequence  of  this  power  of  successive  combi 
nation  is  that  the  simplest  signals  or  marks  will  suffice 
to  express  any  information.  Francis  Bacon  proposed 
for  secret  writing  a  biliteral  cipher,  which  resolves  all 
letters  of  the  alphabet  into  permutations  of  the  two 
letters  a  and  b.  Thus  A.  was  aaaaa,  B  aaaab, 
X  babal),  and  so  on.s  And  in  a  similar  way,  as  Bacon 
clearly  saw,  any  one  difference  can  be  made  the  ground 
of  a  code  of  signals ;  we  can  express,  as  he  says, 
omnia  per  omnia.  The  Morse  alphabet  uses  only  a 
succession  of  long  and  short  marks,  and  other  systems 
of  telegraphic  language  employ  right  and  left  strokes. 
A  single  lamp  obscured  at  various  intervals,  long  or 
short,  may  be  made  to  spell  out  any  words,  and  with 
two  lamps,  distinguished  by  colour  or  position,  we  could 
at  once  represent  Bacon's  biliteral  alphabet.  Mr.  Bab- 
bage  ingeniously  suggested  that  every  lighthouse  in 
the  world  should  be  made  to  spell  out  its  own  name 
or  number  perpetually,  by  flashes  or  obscurations  of 

'Works,'   edited  by   Shaw,   vol.   i.    pp.    141-145,   quoted   in   Rees' 
*  Encyclopaedia,'  art.  Cipher, 


COMBINATIONS  AND  PERMUTATIONS.  221 

various  duration  and  succession,  and  the  scheme  would  be 
easy  of  execution  if  needed. 

Let  us  calculate  the  number  of  combinations  of  dif 
ferent  orders  which  may  arise  out  of  the  presence  or 
absence  of  a  single  mark,  say  A.  Thus  in 


A  [AT  I  A 


we  have  four  distinct  varieties.  Form  them  into  a  group 
of  a  higher  order,  and  consider  in  how  many  ways  we 
may  vary  that  group  by  omitting  one  or  more  of  the 
component  parts.  Now,  as  there  are  four  parts,  and  any 
one  may  be  present  or  absent,  the  possible  varieties  will 
be  2  x  2  x  2  x  2,  or  1 6  in  number.  Form  these  into  a  new 
whole,  and  proceed  again  to  create  variety  by  omitting 
any  one  or  more  of  the  sixteen.  The  number  of  pos 
sible  changes  will  now  be  2.2.2.2.2.2.2.2.2.2.2.2.2.2.2.2, 
or  216,  and  we  can  repeat  the  process  again  and  again  if 
we  wish.  It  will  be  easily  seen  that  we  are  imagining 
the  creation  of  objects,  whose  numbers  are  represented 
in  the  series  of  expressions — 

2 

2  2 

222 

2222,     and  so  on. 
At  the  first  step  we  have  2; -at  the  next  22,  or   4; 

2 

at  the  third  22 ,  or  16,  numbers  of  very  moderate  amount. 
Let  the  reader  calculate  the  next  term,  and  he  will 
be  surprised  to  find  it  leap  up  to  65,536.  But  at  the 
next  step  he  has  to  calculate  the  value  of  65,536 
two's  multiplied  together,  and  it  is  so  great  that  we 
could  not  possibly  compute  it,  the  mere  expression  of 
the  result  requiring  19,729  places  of  figures.  But  go 
one  step  more  and  we  pass  the  bounds  of  all  reason. 
The  sixth  order  of  the  powers  of  two  becomes  so 
great,  that  we  could  not  even  express  the  number  of 


222  THE   PKIXCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

figures     required    in    writing    it    down,    without    using 
about  19,729  figures  for  the  purpose. 

The  successive  orders  of  the  powers  of  two  have  then 
the  following  values  :— 

First  order         .  •  2 

Second  order      .  •  4 

Third  order        .  16 

Fourth  order     .          .  65,536 

Fifth  order,  number  expressed  by  19,729  figures. 
Sixth  order,  number  expressed  by 
figures,  to  express  the  number 
of  which  figures  would  require 
about  .         .         .          .        i9,729  %ures. 

It  may  give  us  a  powerful  notion  of  infinity  to  remem 
ber  that  at  this  sixth  step,  having  long  surpassed  all 
bounds  of  conception,  we  have  made  no  approach  to  the 
goal.  Nay,  were  we  to  make  a  hundred  such  steps,  we 
should  be  as  far  away  as  ever  from  actual  infinity. 

It  is  well  worth  observing  that  our  powers  of  ex 
pression  rapidly  overcome  the  possible  multitude  of 
finite  objects  which  may  exist  in  any  assignable  space. 
Archimedes  showed  long  ago,  in  one  of  the  most  won 
derful  writings  of  antiquity,*  that  the  grains  of  sand 
in  the  world  could  be  numbered,  or  rather,  that  if 
numbered,  the  result  could  readily  be  expressed  in 
arithmetical  notation.  Let  us  extend  his  problem,  and 
ascertain  whether  we  could  express  the  number  of 
atoms  which  could  exist  in  the  visible  universe.  The 
most  distant  stars  which  can  now  be  seen  by  telescopes 
—those  of  the  sixteenth  magnitude — are  supposed  to 
have  a  distance  of  about  33,900,000,000,000,000  miles.u 
Sir  W.  Thomson,  again,  has  shown  reasons  for  supposing 

i  '  Liber  de  Arenas  Numero.' 

u  Chambers' s  'Astronomy'  (1861),  p.  272. 


COMBINATIONS  AND  PERMUTATIONS.  223 


that  there  do  not  exist  more  than  from  3Xio21  to  io26 
molecules  in  a  cubic  centimetre  of  a  solid  or  liquid  sub 
stance/  Assuming  these  data  to  be  true,  for  the  sake 
of  argument,  a  simple  calculation  enables  us  to  show  that 
the  almost  inconceivably  vast  sphere  of  our  stellar  system 
if  entirely  filled  with  solid  matter,  would  not  contain 
more  than  about  68  x  io90  atoms,  that  is  to  say,  a  number 
requiring  for  its  expression  92  places  of  figures.  Now, 
this  number  would  be  immensely  less  than  the  fifth  order 
of  the  powers  of  two. 

In  the  variety  of  logical  relations,  which  may  exist 
between  a  certain  number  of  logical  terms,  we  also  meet 
a  case  of  higher  variations.  Two  terms,  as  it  has  been 
shewn  (p.  154),  may  form  four  distinct  combinations, 
but  the  possible  selections  from  these  series  of  com 
binations  will  be  sixteen  in  number,  or,  excluding  cases 
of  contradiction,  seven.  Three  terms  may  form  eight 
combinations,  allowing  256  selections,  or  with  exclu 
sion  of  contradictory  cases,  193.  Four  terms  give  sixteen 
combinations,  and  no  less  than  65,536  possible  selec 
tions  from  those  combinations,  the  nature  of  which  I 
naturally  abstained  from  exhaustively  examining.  Five 
terms  give  thirty-two  combinations,  and  4,294,967,296 
possible  selections ;  and  for  six  terms  the  corresponding 
numbers  are  sixty-four  and  18,446,744,073,709,551,616. 
Considering  that  it  is  the  most  common  thing  in  the 
world  to  use  an  argument  involving  six  objects  or  terms, 
it  may  excite  some  surprise  that  the  complete  investiga 
tion  of  the  relations  in  which  six  such  terms  may  stand 
to  each  other,  should  involve  an  almost  inconceivable 
number  of  cases.  Yet  these  numbers  of  possible  logical 
relations  belong  only  to  the  second  order  of  combina 
tions. 

x  'Nature/  vol.  i.  p.  553. 


CHAPTER   X. 


THEORY    OF   PROBABILITY. 

t  THE  subject  upon  which  we  now  enter  must  not  be 
regarded  as  an  isolated  and  curious  branch  of  speculation. 
It  is  the  necessary  basis  of  nearly  all  the  judgments 
and  decisions  we  make  in  the  prosecution  of  science,  or 
the  conduct  of  ordinary  affairs.  As  Butler  truly  said, 
'Probability  is  the  very  guide  of  life.'  Had  the  science  of 
numbers  been  developed  for  no  other  purposes,  it  must 
have  been  developed  for  the  calculation  of  probabilities. 
All  our  inferences  concerning  the  future  are  merely  pro 
bable,  and  a  due  appreciation  of  the  degree  of  probability 
depends  entirely  upon  a  due  comprehension  of  the  prin 
ciples  of  the  subject.  I  conceive  that  it  is  impossible 
even  to  expound  the  principles  and  methods  of  induction 
as  applied  to  natural  phenomena,  in  a  sound  manner,  with 
out  resting  them  upon  the  theory  of  probability.  Perfect 
knowledge  alone  can  give  certainty,  and  in  nature  perfect 
knowledge  would  be  infinite  knowledge,  which  is  clearly 
beyond  our  capacities.  We  have,  therefore,  to  content  our 
selves  with  partial  knowledge — knowledge  mingled  with 
ignorance,  producing  doubt. 

Almost  the  greatest  difficulty  in  this  subject  consists  in 
acquiring  a  precise  notion  of  the  matter  treated.  What 
is  it  that  we  number,  and  measure,  and  calculate  in  the 
theory  of  probabilities  \  Is  it  belief,  or  opinion,  or  doubt, 
or  knowledge,  or  chance,  or  necessity,  or  want  of  art  \ 


THE  THEORY  OF  PROBABILITY.  225 

Does  probability  exist  in  the  things  which  are  probable, 
or  in  the  mind  which  regards  them  as  such  \  The 
etymology  of  the  name  lends  us  no  assistance :  for, 
curiously  enough,  probable  is  ultimately  the  same  word 
as  provable,  a  good  instance  of  one  word  becoming  differ 
entiated  to  two  opposite  meanings. 

Chance  cannot  be  the  subject  of  the  theory,  because 
there  is  really  no  such  thing  as  chance,a  regarded  as  pro 
ducing  and  governing  events.  This  name  signifies^//?'?/ (7, 
and  the  notion  is  continually  used  as  a  simile  to  express 
uncertainty,  because  we  can  seldom  predict  how  a  die, 
or  a  coin,  or  a  leaf  will  fall,  or  when  a  bullet  will  hit 
the  mark.  But  every  one  knows,  on  a  little  reflection,  that 
it  is  in  our  knowledge  the  deficiency  lies,  not  in  the  cer 
tainty  of  nature's  laws.  There  is  no  doubt  in  lightning 
as  to  the  point  it  shall  strike ;  in  the  greatest  storm  there 
is  nothing  capricious ;  not  a  grain  of  sand  lies  upon  the 
beach,  but  infinite  knowledge  would  account  for  its  lying 
there  ;  and  the  course  of  every  falling  leaf  is  guided  by 
the  same  principles  of  mechanics  as  rule  the  motions  of 
the  heavenly  bodies. 

Chance  then  exists  not  in  nature,  and  cannot  co-exist 
with  knowledge ;  it  is  merely  an  expression  for  our 
ignorance  of  the  causes  in  action,  and  our  cons;quent 
inability  to  predict  t'.e  result,  or  to  bring  it  about  in 
fallibly.  In  nature  the  happening  of  a  physical  event 
has  been  pre-determined  from  the  first  fashioning  of  the 
universe.  Probability  belongs  wholly  to  the  mind  ;  this 
indeed  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  different  minds  may 
regard  the  very  same  event  at  the  same  time  with  totally 
different  degrees  of  probability.  A  steam-vessel,  for  in 
stance,  is  missing  and  some  persons  believe  that  she  has 
sunk  in  mid-ocean  ;  others  think  differently.  In  the 

a  Dufau,  '  De  la  Methode  d'Observation,'  chap.  iii. 
Q 


226  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

event  itself  there  can  be  no  such  uncei  tainty  ;  the  steam- 
vessel  either  has  sunk  or  has  not  sunk,  and  no  subsequent 
discussion  of  the  probable  nature  of  the  event  can  alter 
the  fact.  Yet  the  probability  of  the  event  will  really 
vary  from  day  to  day,  and  from  mind  to  mind,  according 
as  the  slightest  information  is  gained  regarding  the  vessels 
met  at  sea,  the  weather  prevailing  there,  the  signs  of 
wreck  picked  up,  or  the  previous  condition  of  the  vessel. 
Probability  thus  belongs  to  our  mental  condition,  to  the 
light  in  which  we  regard  events,  the  occurrence  or  non- 
occurrence  of  which  is  certain  in  themselves.  Many 
writers  accordingly  have  asserted  that  probability  is  con 
cerned  with  degree  or  quantity  of  belief.  De  Morgan 
says,b  'By  degree  of  probability  we  really  mean  or  ought 
to  mean  degree  of  belief/  The  late  Professor  Donkin 
expressed  the  meaning  of  probability  as  'quantity  of 
belief;'  but  I  have  never  felt  satisfied  with  such  a  defini 
tion  of  probability.  The  nature  of  belief  is  not  more 
clear  to  my  mind  than  the  notion  it  is  used  to  define. 
But  an  all-sufficient  objection  is,  that  the  theory  does  not 
measure  what  the  belief  is,  but  what  it  ought  to  be.  Few 
minds  think  in  close  accordance  with  the  theory,  and 
there  are  many  cases  of  evidence  in  which  the  belief 
existing  is  habitually  different  from  what  it  ought  to  be. 
Even  if  tlje  state  of  belief  in  any  mind  could  be  measured 
and  expressed  in  figures,  the  results  would  be  worthless. 
The  very  value  of  the  theory  consists  in  correcting  and 
guiding  our  belief,  and  rendering  our  states  of  mind  and 
consequent  actions  harmonious  with  our  knowledge  of 
exterior  conditions. 

This  objection  has  been  clearly  perceived  by  some  of 
those  who  still  used  quantity  of  belief  as  a  definition  of 
probability.  Thus  De  Morgan  adds  — '  Belief  is  but  another 
name  for  imperfect  knowledge.'  Professor  Donkin  has 

b  'Formal  Logic,'  p.  172. 


THE  THEORY  OF  PROBABILITY.  227 


well  said  that  the  quantity  of  belief  is  '  always  relative 
to  a  particular  state  of  knowledge  or  ignorance ;  but  it 
must  be  observed  that  it  is  absolute  in  the  sense  of  not 
being  relative  to  any  individual  mind  ;  since,  the  same 
information  being  presupposed,  all  minds  ought  to  dis 
tribute  their  belief  in  the  same  way/6  Dr.  Boole,  too, 
seemed  to  entertain  a  like  view,  when  he  described  the 
theory  as  engaged  with  '  the  equal  distribution  of  ignor 
ance,'  d  but  we  may  just  as  well  say  that  it  is  engaged 
with  the  equal  distribution  of  knowledge. 

I  prefer  to  dispense  altogether  with  this  obscure  word 
belief,  and  to  say  that  the  theory  of  probability  deals  with 
quantity  of  knowledge,  an  expression  of  which  a  precise 
explanation  and  measure  can  presently  be  given.  An 
event  is  only  probable  when  our  knowledge  of  it  is 
diluted  with  ignorance,  and  exact  calculation  is  needed 
to  discriminate  how  much  we  do  and  do  not  know.  The 
theory  has  been  described  by  some  as  professing  to  evolve 
knowledge  out  of  ignorance;  but  as  Professor  Donkin  has 
admirably  remarked,  it  is  really  '  a  method  of  avoiding 
the  erection  of  belief  upon  ignorance/  e  It  defines  rational 
expectation  by  measuring  the  comparative  amounts  of 
knowledge  and  ignorance,  and  teaches  us  to  regulate  our 
action  with  regard  to  future  events  in  a  way  which  will, 
in  the  long  run,  lead  to  the  least  amount  of  disappointment 
and  injury.  It  is,  as  Laplace  as  happily  expressed  it,  good 
sense  reduced  to  calculation. 

This  theory  appears  to  me  the  noblest  creation  of 
human  intellect,  and  it  passes  my  conception  how  two 
men  possessing  such  high  intelligence  as  Auguste  Cornte 
and  J.  S.  Mill,  could  have  been  found  depreciating  it, 
or  even  vainly  attempting  to  question  its  validity.  To 

c  '  Philosophical  Magazine,'  4th  Series,  vol.  i.  p.  355. 

d  '  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh,'  vol.  xxi.  part  iv. 

e  'Philosophical  Magazine,'  4th  Series,  vol  i.  p.  355. 


228  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

eulogise  the  theory  is  as  needless  as  to  eulogise  reason 
itself. 

Fundamental  Principles  of  the  Tlieory. 

The  calculation  of  probabilities  is  really  founded,  as 
I  conceive,  upon  the  principle  of  reasoning  set  forth  in 
preceding  chapters.  We  must  treat  equals  equally,  and 
what  we  know  of  one  case  may  be  affirmed  of  every 
other  case  resembling  it  in  the  necessary  circumstances. 
The  theory  consists  in  putting  similar  cases  upon  a  par, 
and  distributing  equally  among  them  whatever  knowT- 
ledge  we  may  possess.  Throw  a  penny  into  the  air,  arid 
consider  what  we  know  with  regard  to  its  mode  of  falling. 
We  know  that  it  will  certainly  fall  upon  a  flat  side,  so 
that  either  the  head  or  tail  will  be  uppermost,  but  as 
to  whether  it  will  be  head  or  tail,  our  knowledge  is 
equally  divided.  Whatever  we  know  concerning  head, 
we  know  as  much  concerning  tail,  so  that  we  have  no 

O  ' 

reason  for  expecting  one  more  than  the  other.  The  least 
predominance  of  belief  to  either  side  would  be  irrational, 
as  it  would  consist  in  treating  unequally  things  of  which 
our  knowledge  is  equal. 

The  theory  does  not  in  the  least  require,  as  some 
writers  have  erroneously  supposed,  that  we  should  first 
ascertain  by  experiment  the  equal  facility  of  the  events 
we  are  considering.  So  far  as  we  can  examine  and 
measure  the  causes  in  operation,  events  are  removed 
out  of  the  sphere  of  probability.  The  theory  comes  into 
play  where  ignorance  begins,  and  the  knowledge  we 
possess  requires  to  be  distributed  over  many  cases. 
Nor  does '  the  theory  show  that  the  coin  will  fall  as 
often  on  one  side  as  the  other.  It  is  almost  impossible 
that  this  should  happen,  because  some  inequality  in  the 
form  of  the  coin,  or  some  uniform  manner  in  throwing 
it  up,  is  almost  sure  to  occasion  a  slight  preponderance 


THE  THEORY  OF  PROBABILITY.  229 

in  one  direction.  But  as  we  do  not  previously  know  in 
which  way  a  preponderance  will  exist,  we  have  no  more 
reason  for  expecting  head  than  tail.  Our  state  of  know 
ledge  will  be  changed,  indeed,  should  we  throw  up  the 
coin  many  times  in  succession  and  register  the  result. 
Every  throw  gives  us  some  slight  information  as  to  the 
probable  tendency  of  the  coin,  and  in  subsequent  calcula 
tions  we  must  take  this  into  account.  In  other  cases 
experience  might  show  that  we  had  been  entirely  mis 
taken  ;  we  might  expect  that  a  die  would  fall  as  often 
on  each  of  the  six  sides  as  on  each  other  one  in  the  long 
run  ;  trial  might  show  that  the  die  was  a  loaded  one, 
and  fell  much  the  most  often  on  a  particular  face.  The 
theory  would  not  have  misled  us  :  it  treated  correctly 
the  information  we  had,  which  is  all  that  any  theory 
can  do. 

It  may  be  asked,  Why  spend  so  much  trouble  in  calcu 
lating  from  imperfect  data,  when  a  very  little  trouble 
would  enable  us  to  render  a  conclusion  certain  by  actual 
trial  ?  Why  calculate  the  probability  of  a  measurement 
being  correct,  when  we  can  try  whether  it  is  correct  ? 
But  I  shall  fully  point  out  in  later  parts  of  this  work 
that  in  measurement  we  never  can  attain  perfect  coin 
cidence.  Two  measurements  of  the  same  base  line  in  a 
survey  may  show  a  difference  of  some  inches,  and  there 
may  be  no  means  of  knowing  which  is  the  better  result. 
A  third  measurement  would  probably  agree  with  neither. 
To  select  any  one  of  the  measurements,  would  imply  that 
we  knew  it  to  be  the  most  nearly  correct  one,  which  we 
do  not.  In  this  state  of  ignorance,  the  only  guide  is  the 
theory  of  probability,  which  proves  that  in  the  long  run 
the  mean  of  different  quantities  will  come  most  nearly  to 
the  truth.  In  all  other  scientific  operations  whatsoever,  per 
fect  knowledge  is  impossible,  and  when  we  have  exhausted 
all  our  instrumental  means  in  the  attainment  of  truth, 


230  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

there  is  a  margin  of  error  which  can  only  be  safely  treated 
by  the  principles  of  probability. 

The  method  which  we  employ  in  the  theory  consists 
in  calculating  the  number  of  all  the  cases  or  events 

O 

concerning  which  our  knowledge  is  equal.  If  we  have 
even  the  slightest  reason  for  suspecting  that  one  event 
is  more  likely  to  occur  than  another,  we  should  take  this 
knowledge  into  account.  This  being  done,  we  must 
determine  the  whole  number  of  events  which  are,  so  far 
as  we  know,  equally  likely.  Thus,  if  we  have  no  reason 
for  supposing  that  a  penny  will  fall  more  often  one  way 
than  another,  there  are  two  cases,  head  and  tail,  equally 
likely.  But  if  from  trial  or  otherwise  we  know,  or  think 
we  know,  that  of  100  throws  55  will  give  tail,  then  the 
probability  is  measured  by  the  ratio  of  55  to  100. 

The  mathematical  formulae  of  the  theory  are  exactly  the 
same  as  those  of  the  theory  of  combinations.  In  this 
latter  theory,  we  determine  in  how  many  ways  events  may 
be  joined  together,  and  we  now  proceed  to  use  this  know 
ledge  in  calculating  the  number  of  ways  in  which  a  certain 
event  may  come  about,  and  thus  defining  its  probability. 
If  we  throw  three  pennies  into  the  air,  what  is  the  proba 
bility  that  two  of  them  will  fall  tail  uppermost  ?  This 
amounts  to  asking  in  how  many  possible  ways  can  we 
select  two  tails  out  of  three,  compared  with  the  whole 
number  of  ways  in  which  the  coins  can  be  placed.  Now, 
the  fourth  line  of  the  Arithmetical  Triangle  (p.  208)  gives 
us  the  answer.-  The  whole  number  of  ways  in  which  we 
can  select  or  leave  three  things  is  eight,  and  the  possible 
combinations  of  two  things  at  a  time  is  three  ;  hence  the 
probability  of  two  tails  is  the  ratio  of  three  to  eight- 
From  the  numbers  in  the  triangle  we  may  draw  all  the 
following  probabilities  :— 

One  combination  gives  o  tail.     Probability  £. 

Three  combinations  give  i  tail.     Probability  f . 


THE  THEORY  OF  PROBABILITY.  231 


Three  combinations  give  2  tails.     Probability  f . 

One  combination  gives  3  tails.  Probability  -J-. 
We  could  apply  the  same  considerations  to  the  ima 
ginary  causes  of  the  difference  of  stature,  the  combina 
tions  of  which  were  shown  in  p.  213.  There  are  alto 
gether  128  ways  in  which  seven  causes  can  be  combined 
together.  Now,  twenty-one  of  these  combinations  give 
an  addition  of  two  inches,  so  that  the  probability  of  a 
person  under  the  circumstances  being  five  feet  two  inches 
is  i2—.  The  probability  of  five  feet  three  inches  is  ™258  ; 
of  five  feet  one  inch  is  —-g  ;  of  five  feet  r*8,  and  so  on. 
Thus  the  eighth  line  of  the  Arithmetical  Triangle  gives  all 
the  probabilities  arising  out  of  the  combinations  of  seven 
causes  or  things, 

Rules  for  the  Calculation  of  Probabilities. 

I  will  now  explain  as  simply  as  possible  the  rules 
for  calculating  probabilities.  The  principal  rule  is  as 
follows  : — 

Calculate  the  number  of  events  which  may  happen 
independently  of  each  other,  and  which  are  as  far  as 
is  known  equally  probable.  Make  this  number  the  de 
nominator  of  a  fraction,  and  take  for  the  numerator  the 
number  of  such  events  as  imply  or  constitute  the  hap 
pening  of  the  event,  whose  probability  is  required. 

Thus,  if  the  letters  of  the  word  Roma  be  thrown  down 
casually  in  a  row,  what  is  the  probability  that  they  will 
form  a  significant  Latin  word"?  The  possible  arrange 
ments  of  four  letters  are  4x3x2x1,  or  24  in  number 
(p.  201),  and  if  all  the  arrangements  be  examined,  seven 
of  these  will  be  found  to  have  meaning,  namely  Roma, 
ramo,  oram,  mora,  maro,  armo,  and  amor.  Hence  the 
probability  of  a  significant  result  is  -/4-.f 

*'  AVallis  '  Of  Combinations,'  p.  n1/. 


232  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 


We  must  distinguish  comparative  from  absolute  pro 
babilities.  In  drawing  a  card  casually  from  a  pack,  there 
is  no  reason  to  expect  any  one  card  more  than  any  other. 
Now,  there  are  four  kings  and  four  queens  in  a  pack,  so  that 
there  are  just  as  many  ways  of  drawing  one  as  the  other, 
and  the  probabilities  are  equal.  But  there  are  thirteen 
diamonds,  so  that  the  probability  of  a  king  is  to  that  of 
a  diamond  as  four  to  thirteen.  Thus  the  probabilities 
of  each  are  propoitional  to  their  respective  numbers  of 
ways  of  happening.  Now,  I  can  draw  a  king  in  four 
ways,  and  not  draw  one  in  forty-eight,  so  that  the  pro 
babilities  are  in  this  proportion,  or,  as  is  commonly  said, 
the  odds  against  drawing  a  king  are  forty-eight  to  four. 
The  odds  are  seven  to  seventeen  in  favour,  or  seventeen 
to  seven  against  the  letters  R,o,m,a,  accidentally  forming 
a  significant  word.  The  odds  are  five  to  three  against 
two  tails  appearing  in  three  throws  of  a  penny.  Con 
versely,  when  the  odds  of  an  event  are  given,  and  the 
probability  is  required,  take  the  number  in  favour  of  the 
event  for  numerator,  and  the  sum  of  the  numbers  for 
denominator. 

It  is  obvious  that  an  event  is  certain  when  all  the 
combinations  of  causes  which  can  take  place  produce 
that  event.  Now,  if  we  were  to  represent  the  pro 
bability  of  any  such  event  according  to  our  rule,  it  would 
give  the  ratio  of  some  number  to  itself,  or  unity.  An 
event  is  certain  not  to  happen  when  no  possible  combina 
tion  of  causes  gives  the  event,  and  the  ratio  by  the  same 
rule  becomes  that  of  o  to  some  number.  Hence  it  follows 
that  in  the  theory  of  probability  certainty  is  expressed 
by  i,  and  impossibility  by  o  ;  but  no  mystical  meaning 
should  be  attached  to  these  symbols,  as  they  merely 
express  the  fact  that  all  or  no  possible  combinations  give 
the  event. 

By  a  compound  event,  we  mean  an  event  which  may  be 


THE  THEORY  OF  PROBABILITY.  233 

distinguished  into  two  or  more  simpler  events.  Thus 
the  firing  of  a  gun  may  be  distinguished  into  pulling  the 
trigger,  the  fall  of  the  hammer,  the  explosion  of  the  cap, 
&c.  In  this  example  the  simple  events  are  not  inde 
pendent,  because  if  the  trigger  is  pulled,  the  other  events 
will  under  proper  conditions  necessarily  follow,  and  their 
probabilities  are  therefore  the  same  as  that  of  the  first 
event.  Events  are  independent  when  the  happening  of 
one  does  not  render  the  other  either  more  or  less  probable 
than  before.  Thus  the  death  of  a  person  is  neither  more 
nor  less  probable  because  the  planet  Mars  happens  to  be 
visible.  When  the  component  events  are  independent, 
a  simple  rule  can  be  given  for  calculating  the  probability 
of  the  compound  event,  thus — Multiply  together  the  fi  ac 
tions  expressing  the  probabilities  of  the  independent 
component  events. 

The  probability  of  throwing  tail  twice  with  a  penny 
is  7=r  x  -ET,  or  ^ ;  the  probability  of  throwing  it  three  times 
running  is  ^  x  -^  x  ^,  or  ^ ;  a  result  agreeing  with  that 
obtained  in  an  apparently  different  manner  (p.  230).  In 
fact  when  we  multiply  together  the  denominators,  we  get 
the  whole  number  of  ways  of  happening  of  the  compound 
event,  and  when  we  multiply  the  numerators,  we  get  the 
number  of  ways  favourable  to  the  required  event. 

Probabilities  may  be  added  to  or  subtracted  from  each 
other  under  the  important  condition  that  the  events  in 
question  are  exclusive  of  each  other,  so  that  not  more  than 
one  of  them  can  happen.  It  might  be  argued  that  as 
the  probability  of  throwing  head  at  the  first  trial  is  ^,  and 
at  the  second  trial  also  ^,  the  probability  of  throwing 
it  in  the  first  two  throws  is  \  +  ^,  or  certainty.  Not  only 
is  this  result  evidently  absurd,  but  a  repetition  of  the 
process  would  lead  us  to  a  probability  of  i-|  or  of  any 
greater  number,  results  which  could  have  no  meaning 
whatever.  The  probability  we  wish  to  calculate  is  that  of 


234  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

one  head  in  two  throws,  but  in  our  addition  we  have 
involved  the  case  in  which  two  heads  also  appear.  The 
true  result  is  ^  +  ^  x  \  or  f ,  or  the  probability  of  head  at 
the  first  throw,  added  to  the  exclusive  probability  that  if  it 
does  not  come  at  the  first,  it  will  come  at  the  second. 
Some  of  the  greatest  difficulties  of  the  theory  and  the 
subtlest  errors  arise  from  the  confusion  of  exclusive  and 
unexclusive  alternatives.  I  may  remind  the  reader  that 
the  possibility  of  unexclusive  alternatives  was  a  point 
previously  discussed  (p.  81),  and  to  the  reasons  then  given 
for  considering  alternation  as  logically  unexclusive,  may  be 
added  the  existence  of  these  difficulties  in  the  theory  of 
probability.  The  expression 

Headfirst  throw  or  head  second  throw 
ought  to  be  interpreted  in  our  logical  system  as  including 
both  cases  at  once,  and  so  it  is  in  practice. 

Employment  of  the  Logical  Abecedarian  in  questions  of 

Probability. 

When  the  probabilities  of  certain  events  are  given,  and 
it  is  required  to  deduce  the  probabilities  of  compound 
events,  the  Logical  Abecedarium  may  give  assistance,  pro 
vided  that  there  are  no  special  logical  conditions  and  all 
the  combinations  are  possible.  Thus,  if  there  be  three 
events  A,  B,  C,  of  which  the  probabilities  are  a,  (3,  7,  then 
the  negatives  of  those  events,  expressing  the  absence 
of  the  events,  will  have  the  probabilities  i  —  a,  i  —  /3,  1—7. 
We  have  only  to  insert  these  values  for  the  letters  of  the 
combinations  and  multiply,  and  we  obtain  the  probability 
of  each  combination.  Thus  the  probability  of  ABC  is 
0/37  ;  of  A6c,  a(i  —  /3)(i  -  7). 

We  can  now  clearly  distinguish  between  the  probabilities 
of  exclusive  and  unexclusive  events.  Thus  if  A  and  B 
are  events  which  may  happen  together  like  rain  and  high 


THE  THEORY  OF  PROBABILITY.  235 

tide,  or  an  earthquake  and  a  storm,  the  probability  of 
A  or  B  happening  is  not  the  sum  of  their  separate  proba 
bilities.  For  by  the  Laws  of  Thought  we  develop  A  I  B 
into  AB  |  Kb  \  aB,  and  substituting  a  and  {3,  the  proba 
bilities  of  A  and  B  respectively  we  obtain  a./3  +  a.(i  —  /3)  + 
(i  — a)./3  or  a  +  /3  —  a .  /3.  But  if  events  are  incompossible  or 
incapable  of  happening  together,  like  a  clear  sky  and  rain, 
or  a  new  moon  and  a  full  moon,  then  the  events  are  not 
really  A  or  B  but  A  not-B,  or  B  not-A  or  in  symbols 
Kb  }  ttB.  Now  if  we  take 

fj.  —  probability  of  Kb 

v  =  probability  of  aB, 

then  we  may  add  simply,  and  probability  of  Kb  \  aB  =  /m  +  v. 

Let  the  reader  observe  that  since  the  combination  AB 
cannot  exist,  the  probability  of  Kb  is  not  the  product  of 
the  probabilities  of  A  and  b. 

But  when  certain  combinations  are  logically  impossible, 
it  is  no  longer  allowable  to  substitute  the  probability  of 
each  term  for  the  term,  because  the  multiplication  of 
probabilities  presupposes  the  independence  of  the  events. 
A  large  part  of  the  late  Dr.  Boole's  Laws  of  Thought  is 
devoted  to  an  attempt  to  overcome  this  difficulty  and 
produce  a  General  Method  in  Probabilities,  by  which  from 
certain  logical  conditions  and  certain  given  probabilities  it 
wrould  be  possible  to  deduce  the  probability  of  any  other 
combinations  of  events  under  those  conditions.  Boole 
pursued  his  task  with  wonderful  ingenuity  and  power,  but 
after  spending  much  study  on  his  work,  I  am  compelled  to 
adopt  the  conclusion  that  his  method  is  fundamentally 
erroneous.  As  pointed  out  by  Mr.  Wilbraham  &,  Boole 
obtains  his  results  by  an  arbitrary  assumption,  which  is 
only  the  most  probable,  and  not  the  only  possible  assump- 

K  'Philosophical  Magazine,'  4th  Series,  vol.  vii.  p.  465;  vol.  viii. 
p.  91. 


23G  THE   PRINCIPLES   OF   SCIENCE. 


tion.  The  answer  obtained  is  therefore  not  the  real 
probability,  which  is  usually  indeterminate,  but  only,  as  it 
were,  the  most  probable  probability.  Certain  problems 
solved  by  Boole  are  free  from  logical  conditions  and 
therefore  may  admit  of  valid  answers.  These  as  I  have 

V 

shown h  may  also  be  solved  by  the  simple  combinations 
of  the  Abecedarium,  but  the  remaind  er  of  the  problems 
do  not  admit  of  a  determinate  answer,  at  least  by  Boole's 
method. 

Comparison  of  the  Theory  with  Experience. 

The  Laws  of  Probability  rest  upon  the  simplest  principles 
of  reasoning,  and  cannot  be  really  negatived  by  any 
possible  experience.  It  might  happen  that  a  person 
should  always  throw  a  coin  head  uppermost,  and  appear 
incapable  of  getting  tail  by  chance.  The  theory. would 
not  be  falsified,  because  it  contemplates  the  possibility  of 
the  most  extreme  runs  of  luck.  Our  actual  experience 
might  be  counter  to  ah1  that  is  probable  ;  the  whole 
course  of  events  might  seem  to  be  in  complete  contra 
diction  to  what  we  should  expect,  and  yet  a  casual  con 
junction  of  events  might  be  the  real  explanation.  It  is 
just  possible  that  some  regular  coincidences  which  we 
attribute  to  fixed  laws  of  nature,  are  due  to  the  accidental 
conjunction  of  phenomena  in  the  cases  to  which  our 
attention  is  directed.  All  that  we  can  learn  from 
finite  experience  is  capable,  according  to  the  theory  of 
probabilities,  of  misleading  us,  and  it  is  only  infinite 
experience  that  could  assure  us  of  any  inductive  truths. 

At  the  same  time,  the  probability  that  any  extreme 
runs  of  luck  will  occur  is  so  excessively  slight,  that  it 
would  be  absurd  seriously  to  expect  their  occurrence.  It 

'Memoirs    of   the   Manchester  Literary  and  Philosophical  Society,' 
3rd  Series,  vol.  iv.  p.  347. 


THE  THEORY  OF  PROBABILITY.  237 

is  almost  impossible,  for  instance,  that  any  whist  player 
should  have  played  in  any  two  games  where  the  distri 
bution  of  the  cards  was  exactly  the  same,  by  pure  accident 
(p.  217).  Such  a  thing  as  a  person  always  losing  at 
a  game  of  pure  chance,  is  wholly  unknown.  Coincidences 
of  this  kind  are  not  impossible,  as  I  have  said,  but  they 
are  so  unlikely  that  the  lifetime  of  any  person,  or  indeed 
the  whole  duration  of  history  does  not  give  any  appreciable 
probability  of  their  being  encountered.  Whenever  we 
make  any  extensive  series  of  trials  of  chance  results,  as  in 
throwing  a  die  or  coin,  the  probability  is  great  that  the 
results  will  agree  nearly  with  the  predictions  yielded  by 
theory.  Precise  agreement  must  not  be  expected,  for  that, 
as  the  theory  could  show,  is  highly  improbable.  Several 
attempts  have  been  made  to  test,  in  this  way,  the  accord 
ance  of  theory  and  experience.  The  celebrated  naturalist, 
Buffon,  caused  the  first  trial  to  be  made  by  a  young 
child  who  threw  a  coin  many  times  in  succession,  and  he 
obtained  1992  tails  to  2048  heads.  A  pupil  of  Professor 
De  Morgan  repeated  the  trial  for  his  own  satisfaction,  and 
obtained  2044  tails  to  2048  heads.  In  both  cases  the 
coincidence  with  theory  is  as  close  as  could  be  expected, 
and  the  details  may  be  found  in  De  Morgan's  '  Formal 
Logic,' p.  185. 

Quetelet  also  tested  the  theory  in  a  rather  more  com 
plete  manner,  by  placing  20  black  and  20  white  balls  in  an 
urn  and  drawing  a  ball  out  time  after  time  in  an 
indifferent  manner,  each  ball  being  replaced  before  a 
new  drawing  was  made.  He  found,  as  might  be  expected, 
that  the  greater  the  number  of  drawings  made  the  more 
nearly  were  the  white  and  black  balls  equal  in  number. 
At  the  termination  of  the  experiment  he  had  registered 
2066  white  and  2030  black  balls,  the  ratio  being  i'O21. 

i  '  Letters  on  the  Theoi'y  of  Probabilities,'  translated  by  Downcs,  1849, 
PP-  36.37- 


238 


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 


I  have  made  a  series  of  experiments  in  a  third  manner, 
which  seemed  to  me  even  more  interesting,  and  capable 
of  more  extensive  trial.  Taking  a  handful  of  ten  coins, 
usually  shillings,  I  threw  them  up  time  after  time,  and 
registered  the  numbers  of  heads  which  appeared  each 
time.  Now  the  probability  of  obtaining  10  ,  9  ,  8  ,  7,  &c., 
heads  is  proportional  to  the  number  of  combinations  of 
10,9,8,7,  &c.,  things  out  of  10  things.  Consequently 
the  results  ought  to  approximate  to  the  numbers  in  the 
eleventh  line  of  the  Arithmetical  Triangle.  I  made 
altogether  2048  throws,  in  two  sets  of  1024  throws  each, 
and  the  numbers  obtained  are  given  in  the  following 
table  :  — 


Character  of  Throw. 

Theoretical 
Numbers. 

First 
Series. 

Second 
Series. 

Average. 

Divergence. 

10  Heads     o  Tail 

I 

3 

i 

2 

+    i 

9        ..         i 

10 

12 

^3 

»7* 

+    7i 

8            „            2 

45 

57 

73 

65 

+  20 

7        ..        3 

1  20 

129 

123 

126 

+    6 

6       „        4 

210 

181 

190 

1*5* 

-*54 

5        ..        5 

252 

257 

232 

244! 

~     'U 

4        H         6 

210 

201 

197 

199 

—  ii 

3       ,,        7 

I  2O 

III 

119 

i«5 

-   5 

2          „            8 

45 

52 

50 

51 

+   6 

i        „        9 

10 

2  1 

15 

18 

+   8 

o       „       10 

I 

O 

i 

a 

-  i 

Totals. 

1024 

1O24 

1024 

1024 

—   i 

The  whole  number  of  single  throws  of  coins  amounted 
to  10x2048  or  20,480  in  all,  one  half  of  which  or 
10,240  should  theoretically  give  head.  The  total  number 
of  heads  obtained  was  actually  10,353,  or  5222  in  the 
first  series,  and  5131  in  the  second.  The  coincidence 
with  theory  is  pretty  close,  but  considering  the  large 
number  of  throws  there  is  some  reason  to  suspect  a 
tendency  in  favour  of  heads. 

The  special  interest  of  this  trial  consists  in  the  ex 
hibition,  in  a  practical  form,  of  the  results  of  Bernouilli's 
theorem,  and  the  law  of  error  or  divergence  from  the 


THE  THEORY  OF  PROBABILITY.  239 

mean  to  be  afterwards  more  fully  considered.  It  illus 
trates  the  connection  between  combinations  and  permu 
tations,  which  is  exhibited  in  the  Arithmetical  Triangle, 
and  which  underlies  many  of  the  most  important 
theorems  of  science. 


Probable  Deductive  Arguments. 

With  the  aid  of  the  theory  of  probabilities,  we  may 
extend  the  sphere  of  deductive  argument.  Hitherto  we 
have  treated  propositions  as  certain,  and  on  the  hypo 
thesis  of  certainty  have  deduced  conclusions  equally 
certain.  But  the  information  on  which  we  reason  in 
ordinary  life  is  seldom  or  never  certain,  and  almost  all 
reasoning  is  really  a  question  of  probability.  We  ought 
therefore  to  be  fully  aware  of  the  mode  and  degree  in 
which  the  forms  of  deductive  reasoning  are  affected  by 
the  theory  of  probability,  and  many  persons  might  be 
surprised  at  the  results  which  must  be  admitted.  Many 
controversial  writers  appear  to  consider,  as  De  Morgan 
remarked k,  that  an  inference  from  several  equally  pro 
bable  premises  is  itself  as  probable  as  any  of  them,  but 
the  true  result  is  very  different.  If  a  fact  or  argument 
involves  many  propositions,  and  each  of  them  is  uncertain, 
the  conclusion  will  be  of  very  little  force. 

The  truth  of  a  conclusion  may  be  regarded  as  a  com 
pound  event,  depending  upon  the  premises  happening 
to  be  true ;  thus,  to  obtain  the  probability  of  the  conclusion, 
we  must  multiply  together  the  fractions  expressing  the 
probabilities  of  the  premises.  Thus,  if  the  probability  is 
TJ  that  A  is  B,  and  also  -^  that  B  is  C,  the  conclusion  that 
A  is  C,  on  the  ground  of  these  premises,  is  ^  x  -|  or  ^. 
Similarly  if  there  be  any  number  of  premises  requisite  to 
k  '  Encyclopaedia  Metrop.'  art.  Probabilities,  p.  396. 


240  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

the  establishment  of  a  conclusion  and  their  probabilities 
be  m,  n,  p,  q,  r,  &c.,  the  probability  of  the  conclusion  on 

the  ground  of  these  premises  is  m  x  n  x  p  x  q  x  r  x 

This  product  has  but  a  small  value,  unless  each  of  the 
quanties  m,  n,  &c.,  be  nearly  unity. 

But  it  is  particularly  to  be  noticed  that  the  probability 
thus  calculated  is  not  the  whole  probability  of  the  con 
clusion,  but  that  only  which  it  derives  from  the  premises 
in  question.  Whately's1  remarks  on  this  subject  might 
mislead  the  reader  into  supposing  that  the  calculation  is 
completed  by  multiplying  together  the  probabilities  of  the 
premises.  But  it  has  been  fully  explained  by  De  Morgan111 
that  we  must  take  into  account  the  antecedent  probability 
of  the  conclusion  ;  A  may  be  C  for  other  reasons  besides 
its  being  B,  and  as  he  remarks,  '  It  is  difficult,  if  not 
impossible,  to  produce  a  chain  of  argument  of  which  the 
reasoner  can  rest  the  result  on  those  arguments  only.' 
We  must  also  bear  in  mind  that  the  failure  of  one  argu 
ment  does  not,  except  under  special  circumstances,  disprove 
the  truth  of  the  conclusion  it  is  intended  to  uphold,  other 
wise  there  are  few  truths  which  could  survive  the  ill 
considered  arguments  adduced  in  their  favour.  But  as 
a  rope  does  not  necessarily  break  because  one  strand  in  it 
is  weak,  so  a  conclusion  may  depend  upon  an  endless 
number  of  considerations  besides  those  immediately  in 
view.  Even  when  we  have  no  other  information  we  must 
not  consider  a  statement  as  devoid  of  all  probability.  The 
true  expression  of  complete  doubt  is  a  ratio  of  equality 
between  the  chances  in  favour  of  and  against  it,  and  this 
ratio  is  expressed  in  the  probability  ^. 

Now  if  A  and  C  are  wholly  unknown  things,  we  have 
no  reason  to  believe  that  A  is  C  rather  than  A  is  not  C. 
The  antecedent  probability  is  then  ^.  If  we  also  have  the 

'Elements  of  Logic,'  Book  III,  sections,  n  and  18. 
m  '  Encyclopaedia  Metrop.'  art.  Probabilities,  p.  400. 


THE  THEORY  OF  PROBABILITY.  241 


probabilities  that  A  is  B,  J  and  that  B  is  C,  J,  we  have 
no  right  to  suppose  that  the  probability  of  A  being  C 
is  reduced  by  the  argument  in  its  favour.  If  the  conclu 
sion  is  true  on  its  own  grounds,  the  failure  of  the  argument 
does  not  affect  it ;  thus  its  total  probability  is  its  ante 
cedent  probability,  added  to  the  probability  that  this 
failing,  the  new  argument  in  question  establishes  it. 
There  is  a  probability  ^  that  we  shall  not  require  the 
special  argument ;  a  probability  ^  that  we  shall,  and 
a  probability  ^  that  the  argument  does  in  that  case 
establish  it.  Thus  the  complete  result  is  i  +  i  x  ^,  or  -f. 
In  general  language,  if  a  be  the  probability  formed  on 
a  particular  argument,  and  c  the  antecedent  probability, 
then  the  general  result  is 

i  —  ( i  -  a)  ( i  —  c),  or  a  +  c  —  ac. 

We  may  put  it  still  more  generally  in  this  way  : — Let 
a,  b,  c,  d,  &c.,  be  the  probabilities  of  a  conclusion  grounded 
on  various  arguments  or  considerations  of  any  kind.  It  is 
only  when  all  the  arguments  fail  that  our  conclusion 
proves  finally  untrue  ;  the  probabilities  of  each  failing 
are  respectively  i  —  a,  i—b,  i  —  c,  &c. ;  the  probability 
that  they  will  all  fail  (i  —  a)(i  —  6)(i  —  c)... ;  therefore 
the  probability  that  the  conclusion  will  not  fail  is 
i  — (i  —  a)(i  —  6)(i  —  c)...&c.  On  this  principle  it  follows 
that  every  argument  in  favour  of  a  fact,  however  flimsy 
and  slight,  adds  probability  to  it.  When  it  is  unknown 
whether  an  overdue  vessel  has  foundered  or  not,  every 
slight  indication  of  a  lost  vessel  will  add  some  proba 
bility  to  the  belief  of  its  loss,  and  the  disproof  of  any 
particular  evidence  will  not  disprove  the  event. 

We  must  apply  these  principles  of  evidence  with  great 
care,  and  observe  that  in  a  great  proportion  of  cases  the 
adducing  of  a  weak  argument  does  tend  to  the  disproof  of 
its  conclusion.  The  assertion  may  have  in  itself  great 
inherent  improbability  as  being  opposed  to  other  evidence 

R 


242  THE   PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

or  to  the  supposed  laws  of  nature,  and  every  reasoner  may 
be  assumed  to  be  dealing  plainly,  and  putting  forward  the 
whole  force  of  evidence  which  he  possesses  in  its  favour. 
If  he  brings  but  one  argument,  and  its  probability  a  is 
small,  then  in  the  formula  i  —  (i  —a)(i  —  c)  both  a  and  c 
are  small,  and  the  whole  expression  has  but  little  value. 
The  whole  effect  of  an  argument  thus  turns  upon  the 
question  whether  other  arguments  remain  so  that  we  can 
introduce  other  factors  (i  —6),  (i  —  c),  &c.,  into  the  above 
expression.  In  a  court  of  justice,  in  a  publication  having 
an  express  purpose,  and  in  many  other  cases,  it  is  doubtless 
right  to  assume  that  the  whole  evidence  considered  to 
have  any  value  as  regards  the  conclusion  asserted,  is 
put  forward. 

To  assign  the  antecedent  probability  of  any  proposi 
tion,  may  be  a  matter  of  great  difficulty  or  impos 
sibility,  and  one  with  which  logic  and  the  theory  of  pro 
bability  has  little  concern.  From  the  general  body  of 
science  or  evidence  in  our  possession,  we  must  in  each 
case  make  the  best  judgment  we  can.  But  in  the  absence 
of  all  knowledge  the  probability  should  be  considered  =  ^, 
for  if  we  make  it  less  than  this  we  incline  to  believe  it 
false  rather  than  true.  Thus  before  we  possessed  any 
means  of  estimating  the  magnitudes  of  the  fixed  stars,  the 
statement  that  Sirius  was  greater  than  the  sun  had 
a  probability  of  exactly  ^  ;  for  it  was  as  likely  that  it 
would  be  greater  as  that  it  would  be  smaller  ;  and  so  of 
any  other  star.  This  indeed  was  the  assumption  which 
Michell  made  in  his  admirable  speculations.0  It  might 
seem  indeed  that  as  every  proposition  expresses  an  agree 
ment,  and  the  agreements  or  resemblances  between  phe 
nomena  are  infinitely  fewer  than  the  differences  (p.  52), 
eveiy  proposition  should  in  the  absence  of  other  informa 
tion  be  infinitely  improbable,  or  c  —  o.  But  in  our  logical 

0  '  Philosophical  Transactions'  (1767).     Abridg.  vol.  xii.  p.  435. 


THE  THEORY  OF  PROBABILITY.  243 

system  every  term  may  be  indifferently  positive  or  nega 
tive,  so  that  we  express  under  the  form  A  is  B  or  A  =  AB 
as  many  differences  as  agreements.  It  is  impossible 
therefore  that  we  should  have  any  reason  to  disbelieve 
rather  than  to  believe  it.  We  can  hardly  indeed  invent 
a  proposition  concerning  the  truth  of  which  we  are 
absolutely  ignorant,  except  when  we  are  absolutely  ignorant 
of  the  terms  used.  If  I  ask  the  reader  to  assign  the 
odds  that  a  '  Platythliptic  Coefficient  is  positive'?  he 
will  hardly  see  his  way  to  doing  so,  unless  he  regard 
them  as  even. 

The  assumption  that  complete  doubt  is  properly  ex 
pressed  by  4  has  been  called  in  question  by  Bishop  Terrot,i 
who  proposes  instead  the  indefinite  symbol  § ;  and  he 
considers  that  'the  d  priori  probability  derived  from 
absolute  ignorance  has  no  effect  upon  the  force  of  a 
subsequently  admitted  probability/  But  a  writer  of  far 
greater  power,  the  late  Professor  Donkin,  has  strongly 
defended  the  commonly  adopted  expression  of  complete 
doubt.  If  we  grant  that  the  probability  may  have  any 
value  between  o  and  i,  and  that  every  separate  value 
is  equally  likely,  then  n  and  i-n  are  equally  likely, 
and  the  average  is  always  J.  Or  we  may  take  p  .  dp 
to  express  the  probability  that  our  estimate  concerning 
any  proposition  should  lie  between  p  and  p  +  dp.  The 
complete  probability  of  the  proposition  is  then  the  in 
tegral  taken  between  the  limits  i  and  o,  or  again  ^r. 

«* 

Difficulties  of  the  Theory. 

The  doctrine  of  probability,  though  undoubtedly  true, 
requires  very  careful  application.  Not  only  is  it  a  branch 

v  'Philosophical  Transactions,'  vol.  146.  part  i.  p,  273. 

9  '  Transactions  of  the  Edinburgh  Philosophical  Society,'  vol.  xxi.  p.  375, 

r  'Philosophical  Magazine,'  4th  Series,  vol.  i.  p.  361. 


B    2 


244  THE   PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 


of  mathematics  in  which  positive  blunders  are  frequently 
committed,  but  it  is  a  matter  of  great  difficulty  in  many 
cases,  to  be  sure  that  the  formulae  correctly  represent  the 
data  of  the  problem.  These  difficulties  often  arise  from 
the  logical  complexity  of  the  conditions,  which  might  be, 
perhaps  to  some  extent  cleared  up  by  constantly  bearing 
in  mind  the  system  of  combinations  as  developed  in  the 
Indirect  Logical  Method.  In  the  study  of  probabilities, 
mathematicians  had  unconsciously  employed  logical  pro 
cesses  far  in  advance  of  those  in  possession  of  logicians, 
and  the  Indirect  Method  is  but  the  full  statement  of 
these  processes. 

It  is  very  curious  how  often  the  most  acute  and  power 
ful  intellects  have  gone  astray  in  the  calculation  of 
probabilities.  Seldom  was  Pascal  mistaken,  yet  he  in 
augurated  the  science  with  a  mistaken  solution.8  Leibnitz 
fell  into  the  extraordinary  blunder  of  thinking  that  the 
number  twelve  was  as  probable  a  result  in  the  throwing 
of  two  dice  as  the  number  eleven.*  In  not  a  few  cases  the 
false  solution  first  obtained  seems  more  plausible  to  the 
present  day  than  the  correct  one  since  demonstrated. 
James  Bernouilli  candidly  records  two  false  solutions  of 
a  problem  which  he  at  first  thought  self-evident ;  u  and  he 
adds  an  express  warning  against  the  risk  of  error,  especially 
when  we  attempt  to  reason  on  this  subject  without  a  rigid 
adherence  to  the  methodical  rules  and  symbols. x  Mont- 
mort  was  not  free  from  similar  mistakes/  and  as  to 
D'Alembert,  great  though  his  reputation  was,  and  perhaps 
is,  he  constantly  fell  into  blunders  which  must  diminish 
the  weight  of  his  opinions.2  He  could  not  perceive,  for 

K  Montucla,  '  Histoire  des  Hathdmatiques,'  vol.  iii.  p.  386. 
*  Leibnitz  '  Opera/  Dutens'  Edition,  vol.  vi.  part  i.  p.  217.     Todhunter's 
'  History  of  the  Theory  of  Probability,'  p.  48. 

11  Todlmnter,  pp.  67-69.  *  Ibid.  p.  63.  y  Ibid.  p.  100. 

''•  Hii«l.  pp.  258-59,  286. 


THE  THEORY  OF  PROBABILITY.  245 

instance,  that  the  probabilities  would  be  the  same  when 
coins  are  thrown  successively  as  when  thrown  simul 
taneously. a  Some  men  of  high  ability,  such  as  Ancillon, 
Moses  Mendelssohn,  Garve,b  Auguste  Comte c  and  J.  S. 
Mill,d  have  so  far  misapprehended  the  theory,  as  to 
question  its  value  or  even  to  dispute  altogether  its 
vaKdity. 

Many  persons  have  a  fallacious  tendency  to  believe  that 
when  a  chance  event  has  happened  several  times  together 
in  an  unusual  conjunction,  it  is  less  likely  to  happen 
again.  D'Alembert  seriously  held  that  if  head  was  thrown 
three  times  running  with  a  coin,  tail  would  more  probably 
appear  at  the  next  trial.6  Bequelin  adopted  the  same 
opinion,  and  yet  there  is  no  reason  for  it  whatever.  If 
the  event  be  really  casual,  what  has  gone  before  cannot  in 
the  slightest  degree  influence  it. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  more  often  the  most  casual 
event  takes  place  the  more  likely  it  is  to  happen  again; 
because  there  is  some  slight  empirical  evidence  of  a 
tendency,  as  will  afterwards  be  pointed  out.  The  source  of 
the  fallacy  is  to  be  found  entirely  in  the  feelings  of 
surprise  with  which  we  witness  an  event  happening  by 
apparent  chance,  in  a  manner  which  seems  to  proceed  from 
design. 

Misapprehension  may  also  arise  from  overlooking  the 
difference  between  permutations  and  combinations.  To 
throw  ten  heads  in  succession  with  a  coin  is  no  more 
unlikely  than  to  throw  any  other  particular  succession 
of  heads  and  tails,  but  it  is  much  less  likely  than  five 
heads  and  five  tails  without  regard  to  their  order,  be- 

a  Todhunter,  p.  279.  b  Ibid.  p.  453. 

c  'Positive  Philosophy/  translated  by  Martineau,  vol.  ii.  p.  120. 
d  'System  of  Logic,'  bk.  iii.  chap.  18.  5th  Ed.  vol.  ii.  p.  61. 
e  Montucla,  '  Histoire/  vol.  iii.  p.  405.     Todhunter,  p.  263. 


246  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

cause  there  are  no  less  than  252  different  particular 
throws  which  will  give  this  result,  when  we  abstract 
the  difference  of  order. 

Difficulties  arise  in  the  application  of  the  theory  from 
our  habitual  disregard  of  slight  probabilities.  We  are 
obliged  practically  to  accept  truths  as  certain  which  are 
nearly  so,  because  it  ceases  to  be  worth  while  to  calculate 
the  difference.  No  punishment  could  be  inflicted  if 
absolutely  certain  evidence  of  guilt  were  required,  and  as 
Locke  remarks,  '  He  that  will  not  stir  till  he  infallibly 
knows  the  business  he  goes  about  will  succeed,  will 
have  but  little  else  to  do  but  to  sit  still  and  perish.'f 
There  is  not  a  moment  of  our  lives  when  we  do  not  lie 
under  a  slight  danger  of  death,  or  some  most  terrible  fate. 
There  is  not  a  single  action  of  eating,  drinking,  sitting 
down,  or  standing  up  which  has  not  proved  fatal  to  some 
person.  Several  philosophers  have  tried  to  assign  the 
limit  of  the  probabilities  which  we  regard  as  zero  ;  Buffon 
named  f^Voo*  because  it  is  the  probability  that  a  man  of 
56  years  of  age  would  die  the  next  day,  and  is  practically 
disregarded.  Pascal  had  remarked  that  a  man  would  be 
esteemed  a  fool  for  hesitating  to  accept  death  when  three 
dice  gave  sixes  twenty  times  running,  if  his  reward  in 
case  of  a  different  result  was  to  be  a  crown  ;  but  as  the 
chance  of  death  in  question  is  only  in-660,  or  unity  divided 
by  a  number  of  47  places  of  figures,  we  may  be  said 
every  day  to  incur  greater  risks  for  less  motives.  There 
is  far  greater  risk  of  death,  for  instance,  in  a  game  of 
cricket. 

Nothing  is  more  requisite  than  to  distinguish  carefully 
between  the  truth  of  a  theory  and  the  truthful  application 
of  the  theory  to  actual  circumstances.  As  a  general  rule, 
events  in  nature  or  art  will  present  a  complexity  of 

1  'Essay  on  the  Human  Understanding,'  bk.  IV.  ch.  14.  §  i. 


THE  THEORY  OF  PROBABILITY.  247 

relations  exceeding  our  powers  of  treatment.  The  infinitely 
intricate  action  of  the  mind  often  intervenes  and  renders 
complete  analysis  hopeless.  If,  for  instance,  the  probability 
that  a  marksman  shall  hit  the  target  in  a  single  shot  be 
i  in  10,  we  might  seem  to  have  no  difficulty  in  calculating 
the  probability  of  any  succession  of  hits  ;  thus  the  proba 
bility  of  three  successive  hits  would  be  one  in  a  thousand. 
But,  in  reality,  the  confidence  and  experience  derived  from 
the  first  successful  shot  would  render  a  second  success 
more  probable.  The  events  are  not  really  independent, 
and  there  would  generally  be  a  far  greater  preponderance 
of  runs  of  apparent  luck,  than  a  simple  calculation 
of  probabilities  could  account  for.  In.  many  persons, 
however,  a  remarkable  series  of  successes  will  produce  a 
degree  of  excitement  rendering  continued  success  almost 
impossible. 

Attempts  to  apply  the  theory  of  probabilities  to  the 
results  of  judicial  proceedings  have  proved  of  little  value, 
simply  because  the  conditions  are  far  too  intricate.  As 
Laplace  said,g  '  Tant  de  passions,  d'mterets  divers  et  de 
circonstances  compliquent  les  questions  relatives  a  ces 
objets,  qu'elles  sont  presque  toujours  insolubles.'  Men 
acting  on  a  jury,  or  giving  evidence  before  a  court,  are 
subject  to  so  many  complex  influences  that  no  mathema 
tical  formulae  can  be  framed  to  express  the  real  conditions. 
Jurymen  or  even  judges  on  the  bench  cannot  be  regarded 
as  acting  independently,  with  a  definite  probability  in 
favour  of  each  delivering  a  correct  judgment.  Each  man 
of  the  jury  is  more  or  less  influenced  by  the  opinion  of  the 
others,  and  there  are  subtle  effects  of  character  and  manner 
and  strength  of  mind  which  defy  human  analysis.  Even 
in  physical  science  we  shall  in  comparatively  few  cases  be 
able  to  apply  the  theory  in  a  definite  manner,  because  the 

s  Quoted  by  Todhunter,  'History  of  the  Theory  of  Probability,'  p.  410. 


248  THE  PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

data  required  for  the  estimation  of  probabilities  are  too 
complicated  and  difficult  to  obtain.  But  such  failures  in 
no  way  diminish  the  truth  and  beauty  of  the  theory  itself; 
for  in  reality  there  is  no  branch  of  science  in  which,  as  we 
shall  afterwards  fully  consider,  our  symbols  can  cope  with 
the  complexity  of  Nature.  As  the  late  Professor  Donkin 
excellently  said,— 

'  I  do  not  see  on  what  ground  it  can  be  doubted  that 
every  definite  state  of  belief  concerning  a  proposed 
hypothesis,  is  in  itself  capable  of  being  represented 
by  a  numerical  expression,  however  difficult  or  im 
practicable  it  may  be  to  ascertain  its  actual  value.  It 
would  be  very  difficult  to  estimate  in  numbers  the  vis 
viva  of  all  the  particles  of  a  human  body  at  any  instant ; 
but  no  one  doubts  that  it  is  capable  of  numerical  ex 
pression/11 

The  difficulty,  in  short,  is  merely  relative  to  our  know 
ledge  and  skill,  and  is  not  absolute  or  inherent  in  the 
subject.  We  must  distinguish  between  what  is  theo 
retically  conceivable  and  what  is  practicable  with  our 
present  mental  resources.  Provided  that  our  aspirations 
are  pointed  in  a  right  direction,  we  must  not  allow  them 
to  be  damped  by  the  consideration  that  they  pass  beyond 
what  can  now  be  turned  to  immediate  use.  In  spite  of 
its  immense  difficulties  of  application,  and  the  aspersions 
which  have  been  mistakenly  cast  upon  it,  the  theory  of 
probabilities,  I  repeat,  is  the  noblest,  as  it  will  in  course 
of  time  prove,  perhaps  the  most  fruitful  branch  of  mathe 
matical  science.  It  is  the  very  guide  of  life,  and  hardly 
can  we  take  a  step  or  make  a  decision  of  any  kind  without 
correctly  or  incorrectly  making  an  estimation  of  proba 
bilities.  In  the  next  chapter  we  proceed  to  consider  how 
the  whole  cogency  of  inductive  reasoning,  as  applied  to 


h  < 


Philosophical  Magazine,'  4th  Series,  vol.  i.  p.  354. 


THE  THEORY  OF  PROBABILITY.  249 

physical'  science  rests  upon  probability.  The  truth  or 
untruth  of  a  natural  law,  when  carefully  investigated, 
resolves  itself  into  a  high  or  low  degree  of  probability, 
and  this  is  the  case  whether  or  not  we  are  capable  of  pro 
ducing  precise  numerical  data. 


CHAPTEE  XI. 

PHILOSOPHY    OF   INDUCTIVE   INFERENCE. 

WE  have  inquired  into  the  nature  of  the  process  of 
perfect  induction,  whereby  we  pass  backwards  from  certain 
observed  combinations  of  qualities  or  events,  to  the  logical 
conditions  governing  such  combinations.     We  have  also 
investigated  the  grounds  of  that  theory  of  probability, 
which  must  be  our  guide  when  we  leave  certainty  behind 
us,  and  dilute  knowledge  with  ignorance.     There  is  now 
before  us  the  difficult  task  of  endeavouring  to  decide  how, 
by  the  aid  of  that  theory,  we  can  ascend  from  the  facts  to 
the  laws  of  nature ;    and  may  then  with  more  or  less 
success  anticipate  the  future  course  of  events.     All  our 
knowledge  of  natural  objects  must  be  ultimately  derived 
from  observation,  and  the  difficult  question  arises — How 
can  we  ever  know  anything  which  we  have  not  directly 
observed  through  one  of  our  senses,  the  apertures  of  the 
rnind  "?     The   practical  utility  of  reasoning  is  to  assure 
ourselves  that,  at  a  determinate  time  or  place,  or  under 
specified  conditions,  a  certain   phenomenon  may  be  ob 
served.     When  we  can  use  our  senses  and  perceive  that 
the  phenomenon  does  occur,  reasoning  is  superfluous.     If 
the  senses  cannot  be  used,  because  the  event  is  in  the 
future,   or  out   of  reach,  how  can  reasoning  take  their 
place  1     Apparently,  at  least,  we  must  infer  the  unknown 
from   the   known,   and   the    mind   must  itself  create  an 
addition  to  the  sum  of  knowledge.     But  I  hold  that  it  is 
quite  impossible  to  make  any  real  additions  to  the  con- 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  INDUCTIVE  INFERENCE.         251 

tents  of  our  knowledge,  except  through  new  impressions 
upon  the  senses,  or  upon  some  seat  of  feeling.  I  shall 
attempt  to  show  that  inference,  whether  inductive  or 
deductive,  is  never  more  than  an  unfolding  of  the  contents 
of  our  experience,  and  that  it  always  proceeds  upon  the 
assumption  that  the  future  and  the  unperceived  will  be 
governed  by  the  same  conditions  as  the  past  and  the 
perceived,  an  assumption  which  will  often  prove  to  be 
mistaken. 

In  inductive  just  as  in  deductive  reasoning,  the  con 
clusion  never  passes  beyond  the  premises.  Reasoning 
adds  no  more  to  the  implicit  contents  of  our  knowledge, 
than  the  arrangement  of  the  specimens  in  a  museum  adds 
to  the  number  of  those  specimens.  This  arrangement  adds 
to  our  knowledge  in  a  certain  sense  :  it  allows  us  to  per 
ceive  the  similarities  and  peculiarities  of  the  individual 
specimens,  and  on  the  assumption  that  the  museum  is  an 
adequate  representation  of  nature,  it  enables  us  to  judge 
of  the  prevailing  forms  of  natural  objects.  Bacon's  first 
aphorism  holds  perfectly  true,  that  man  knows  nothing 
but  what  he  has  observed,  provided  that  we  include  his 
whole  sources  of  experience,  and  the  whole  implicit  con 
tents  of  his  knowledge.  Inference  but  unfolds  the  hidden 
meaning  of  our  observations,  and  the  theory  of  probability 
shows  how  far  we  go  beyond  our  data  in  assuming  that 
new  specimens  will  resemble  the  old  ones,  or  that  the 
future  may  be  regarded  as  proceeding  uniformly  with  the 
past. 

Various  Classes  of  Inductive  Truths. 

It  will  be  desirable,  in  the  first  place,  to  distinguish 
between  the  several  kinds  of  truths  which  we  endeavour 
to  establish  by  induction.  Although  there  is  a  certain 
common  and  universal  element  in  all  our  processes  of 


252  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

reasoning,  yet  a  diversity  arises  in  their  application. 
Similarity  of  conditions  between  the  events  from  which 
we  argue,  and  those  to  which  we  argue,  must  always  be 
the  ground  of  inference;  but  this  similarity  may  have 
regard  either  to  time  or  place,  or  the  simple  logical 
combination  of  events,  or  to  any  conceivable  junction  of 
circumstances  involving  quality,  time,  and  place.  Having 
met  with  many  pieces  of  substance  possessing  ductility, 
and  a  bright  yellow  colour,  and  having  discovered,  by 
perfect  induction,  that  they  all  possess  in  addition  a  high 
specific  gravity,  and  a  freedom  from  the  corrosive  action 
of  acids,  we  are  led  to  expect  that  every  piece  of  substance, 
possessing  like  ductility,  and  a  similar  yellow  colour,  will 
have  an  equally  high  specific  gravity,  and  a  like  freedom 
from  corrosion  by  acids.  This  is  a  case  of  the  co-existence 
of  qualities  ;  for  the  character  of  the  specimens  examined 
alters  not  with  time  or  place. 

In  a  second  class  of  cases,  time  will  enter  as  a  prin 
cipal  ground  of  similarity.  When  we  hear  a  clock 
pendulum  beat  moment  after  moment,  at  equal  in 
tervals,  and  with  a  uniform  sound,  we  confidently  expect 
that  the  stroke  will  continue  to  be  repeated  uniformly. 
A  comet  having  appeared  several  times  at  nearly  equal 
intervals,  we  infer  that  it  will  probably  appear  again 
at  the  end  of  another  like  interval.  A  man  who  has 
returned  home  evening  after  evening  for  many  years, 
and  found  his  house  standing,  may,  on  like  grounds, 
expect  that  it  will  be  standing  the  next  evening,  and  on 
many  succeeding  evenings.  Even  the  continuous  exist 
ence  of  an  object  in  an  unaltered  state,  or  the  finding 
again  of  that  which  we  have  hidden,  is  but  a  matter  of 
inference  to  be  decided  by  experience. 

A  still  larger  and  more  complex  class  of  cases  involves 
the  relations  of  space,  in  addition  to  those  of  time  and 
quality.  Having  observed  that  every  triangle  drawn  upon 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  INDUCTIVE  INFERENCE.          253 

the  diameter  of  a  circle,  with  its  apex  upon  the  circum 
ference,  apparently  contains  a  right  angle,  we  may 
ascertain  that  all  triangles  in  similar  circumstances  will 
contain  right  angles.  This  is  a  case  of  pure  space  reason 
ing,  apart  from  circumstances  of  time  or  quality,  and  it 
seems  to  be  governed  by  different  principles  of  reasoning. 
I  shall  endeavour  to  show,  however,  that  geometrical 
reasoning  differs  but  in  degree  from  that  which  applies 
to  other  natural  relations.  If  we  observe  that  the  com 
ponents  of  a  binary  star  have  moved  for  a  length  of  time 
in  elliptic  curves,  we  have  reason  to  believe  that  they  will 
continue  so  to  move.  Time  and  space  relations  are  here 
complicated  together. 

The  Relation  of  Cause  and  Effect. 

In  a  very  large  part  of  the  scientific  investigations 
which  must  be  considered,  we  deal  with  events  which 
follow  from  previous  events,  or  with  existences  which 
succeed  existences .  Science,  indeed,  might  arise  even  were 
material  nature  a  fixed  and  changeless  whole.  Endow 
mind  with  the  power  to  travel  about,  and  compare  part 
with  part,  and  it  could  certainly  draw  inferences  concern 
ing  the  similarity  of  forms,  the  co-existence  of  qualities, 
or  the  preponderance  of  a  particular  kind  of  matter  in 
a  changeless  world.  A  solid  universe,  in  at  least  approxi 
mate  equilibrium,  is  not  inconceivable,  and  then  the  rela 
tion  of  cause  and  effect  would  evidently  be  no  more  than 
the  relation  of  before  and  after.  As  nature  exists,  how 
ever,  it  is  a  progressive  existence,  ever  moving  and 
changing  as  time,  the  great  independent  variable,  pro 
ceeds.  Hence  it  arises  that  we  must  continually  compare 
what  is  happening  now  with  what  happened  a  moment 
before,  arid  a  moment  before  that  moment,  and  so  on, 
until  we  reach  indefinite  periods  of  past  time.  A  comet 


254  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

is  seen  moving  in  the  sky,  or  its  constituent  particles 
illumine  the  heavens  with  their  tails  of  fire.  We  cannot 
explain  the  present  movements  of  such  a  body  without 
supposing  its  prior  existence,  with  a  determinate  amount 
of  energy  and  direction  of  motion  ;  nor  can  we  validly 
suppose  that  our  task  is  concluded  when  we  find  that  it 
came  wandering  to  our  solar  system  through  the  un 
measured  vastness  of  surrounding  space.  Every  event 
must  have  a  cause,  and  that  cause  again  a  cause,  until 
we  are  lost  in  the  obscurity  of  the  past,  and  are  driven 
to  the  belief  in  one  First  Cause,  by  whom  the  whole 
course  of  nature  was  determined. 


Fallacious  Use  of  the  Term  Cause. 

The  words  Cause  and  Causation  have  given  rise  to  in 
finite  trouble  and  obscurity,  and  have  in  no  slight  degree 
retarded  the  progress  of  science.  From  the  time  of 
Aristotle,  the  work  of  philosophy  has  been  often  de 
scribed  as  the  discovery  of  the  causes  of  things,  and 
Francis  Bacon  adopted  the  notion  when  he  said a  '  vere 
scire  esse  per  causas  scire.'  Even  now  it  is  not  uncom 
monly  supposed  that  the  knowledge  of  causes  is  some 
thing  different  from  other  knowledge,  and  consists,  as  it 
were,  in  getting  possession  of  the  keys  of  nature.  A 
single  word  may  thus  act  as  a  spell,  and  throw  the 
clearest  inteUect  into  confusion,  as  I  have  often  thought 
that  Locke  was  thrown  into  confusion  when  endeavouring 
to  find  a  meaning  for  the  word  power.1'  In  Mr.  Mill's 
'  System  of  Logic '  the  term  cause  seems  to  have  re 
asserted  its  old  noxious  power.  Not  only  does  Mr.  Mill 
treat  the  Laws  of  Causation  as  almost  co-extensive  with 

a  'Novum  Organum/  bk.  ii.  Aphorism  2. 

b  'Essay  on  the  Human  Understanding/  bk.  ii.  chap.  xxi. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  INDUCTIVE  INFERENCE.          255 

science,  but  he  so  uses  the  expression  as  to  imply  that 
when  once  we  pass  within  the  circle  of  causation  we  deal 
with  certainties. 

The  philosophical  danger  which  attaches  to  the  use  of 
this  word  may  be  thus  described.  A  cause  is  defined  as 
the  necessary  or  invariable  antecedent  of  an  event,  so 
that  when  the  cause  exists  the  effect  will  also  exist  or 
soon  follow.  If  then  we  know  the  cause  of  an  event,  we 
know  when  it  will  certainly  happen  ;  and  as  it  is  implied 
that  science,  by  a  proper  experimental  method,  may  attain 
to  a  knowledge  of  causes,  it  follows  that  experience  may 
give  us  a  certain  knowledge  of  future  events.  Now,  no 
thing  is  more  unquestionable  than  that  finite  experience 
can  never  give  us  certain  knowledge  of  the  future,  so  that 
either  a  cause  is  not  an  invariable  antecedent,  or  else  we 
can  never  gain  certain  knowledge  as  to  causes.  The  first 
horn  of  this  dilemma  is  hardly  to  be  accepted.  Doubtless 
there  is  in  nature  some  invariably  acting  mechanism,  such 
that  from  certain  fixed  conditions  an  invariable  result 
always  emerges.  But  we,  with  our  finite  minds  and 
short  experience,  can  never  penetrate  the  mystery  of 
those  existences  which  embody  the  Will  of  the  Creator, 
and  evolve  it  throughout  time.  We  are  in  the  position 
of  spectators  who  witness  the  productions  of  a  compli 
cated  machine,  but  are  not  allowed  to  examine  its  inti 
mate  structure.  We  learn  what  does  happen  and  what 
does  appear,  but  if  we  ask  for  the  reason,  the  answer 
would  involve  an  infinite  depth  of  mystery.  The  simplest 
bit  of  matter,  or  the  most  trivial  incident,  such  as  the 
stroke  of  two  billiard  balls,  offers  infinitely  more  to  learn 
than  ever  the  human  intellect  can  fathom.  The  word  cause 
covers  just  as  much  untold  meaning  as  any  of  the  words 
substance,  matter,  thought,  existence. 


256  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

Confusion  of  Two  Questions. 

The  subject  is  much  complicated,  too,  by  the  confusion 
of  two  distinct  questions.  An  event  having  happened,  we 
may  ask — 

(j)  Is  there  any  cause  for  the  event  \ 
(2)  Of  what  kind  is  that  cause  1 

No  one  would  assert  that  the  mind  possesses  any 
faculty  capable  of  inferring,  prior  to  experience,  that  the 
occurrence  of  a  sudden  noise  with  flame  and  smoke  indi 
cates  the  combustion  of  a  black  powder,  formed  by  the 
mixture  of  black,  white,  and  yellow  powders.  The  greatest 
upholder  of  d  priori  doctrines  will  allow  that  the  parti 
cular  aspect,  shape,  size,  colour,  texture,  and  other  qualities 
of  a  cause  must  be  gathered  from  experience  and  through 
the  senses. 

The  question  whether  there  is  any  cause  at  all  for  an 
event,  is  of  a  totally  different  kind.  If  an  explosion  could 
happen  without  any  prior  existing  conditions,  it  must  be 
a  new  creation — a  distinct  addition  to  the  universe.  It 
may  be  plausibly  held  that  we  can  imagine  neither  the 
creation  nor  annihilation  of  anything.  As  regards  matter, 
this  has  long  been  held  true  ;  as  regards  force,  it  is  now 
almost  universally  assumed  as  an  axiom  that  energy  can 
neither  come  into  nor  go  out  of  existence  without  distinct 
acts  of  Creative  Will.  That  there  exists  any  instinctive 
belief  to  this  effect,  indeed,  seems  doubtful.  We  find 
Lucretius,  a  philosopher  of  the  utmost  intellectual  power 
and  cultivation,  gravely  assuming  that  his  raining  atoms 
could  turn  aside  from  their  straight  paths  in  a  self-deter 
mining  manner,  and  by  this  spontaneous  origination  of 
energy  determine  the  form  of  the  universe.0  Sir  George 
Airy,  too,  seriously  discussed  the  mathematical  conditions 

0  '  De  Rerum  Natura/  bk.  ii.  11.  216-293. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  INDUCTIVE  INFERENCE.         257 

under  which  a  perpetual  motion,  that  is,  a  perpetual 
source  of  self-created  energy  might  exist.d  The  larger 
part  of  the  philosophic  world  has  long  held  that  in  mental 
acts  there  is  free  will — in  short,  self-causation.  It  is  in 
vain  to  attempt  to  reconcile  this  doctrine  with  that  of  an 
intuitive  belief  in  causation,  as  Sir  W.  Hamilton  candidly 
allowed. 

It  is  quite  obvious,  moreover,  that  to  assert  the  exist 
ence  of  a  cause  for  every  event,  cannot  do  more  than 
remove  into  the  indefinite  past  the  inconceivable  fact  and 
mystery  of  creation.  At  any  given  moment  matter  and 
energy  were  equal  to  what  they  are  at  present,  or  they 
were  not  ;  if  equal,  we  may  make  the  same  inquiry  con 
cerning  any  other  moment,  however  long  prior,  and  we 
are  thus  obliged  to  accept  one  horn  of  the  dilemma — ex 
istence  from  infinity,  or  creation  at  some  moment.  This 
is  but  one  of  the  many  cases  in  which  we  are  compelled 
to  believe  in  one  or  other  of  two  alternatives,  both  incon 
ceivable.  My  present  purpose,  however,  is  to  point  out 
that  we  must  not  confuse  this  supremely  difficult  question 
with  that  into  which  inductive  science  inquires  on  the 
foundation  of  facts.  By  induction  we  gain  no  certain 
knowledge  ;  but  by  observation,  and  the  inverse  use  of 
deductive  reasoning,  we  estimate  the  probability  that  an 
event  which  has  occurred  was  preceded  by  conditions  of 
specified  character,  or  that  such  conditions  will  be  followed 
by  the  event. 

Definition  of  the  Term  Cause. 

Clear  definitions  of  the  word  cause  have  been  given  by 
several  philosophers.  Hobbes  has  said,  '  A  cause  is  the 
sum  or  aggregate  of  all  such  accidents  both  in  the  agents 

d  'Cambridge  Philosophical  Transactions/  [1830]  vol.  iii.  pp.  369^ 
372. 

S 


258  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

and  the  patients,  as  concur  in  the  producing  of  the  effect 
propounded  ;  all  which  existing  together,  it  cannot  be 
understood  but  that  the  effect  existeth  with  them;  or 
that  it  can  possibly  exist  if  any  of  them  be  absent/ 
Dr.  Brown,  in  his  'Essay  on  Causation/  gave  a  nearly 
corresponding  statement.  'A  cause,'  he  sayse,  'may  be 
defined  to  be  the  object  or  event  which  immediately 
precedes  any  change,  and  which  existing  again  in  similar 
circumstances  will  be  always  immediately  followed  by  a 
similar  change/  Of  the  kindred  word  poiver,  he  like 
wise  says  :  f  '  Power  is  nothing  more  than  that  invariable- 
ness  of  antecedence  which  is  implied  in  the  belief  of 
causation/ 

These  definitions  may  be  accepted  with  the  qualifica 
tion  that  our  knowledge  of  causes  in  such  a  sense  can 
be  probable  only.  The  work  of  science  consists  in  ascer 
taining  the  combinations  in  which  phenomena  present 
themselves.  Concerning  every  event  we  shall  have  to 
determine  its  probable  conditions,  or  group  of  antecedents 
from  which  it  probably  follows.  An  antecedent  is  any 
thing  which  exists  prior  to  an  event ;  a  consequent  is 
anything  which  exists  subsequently  to  an  antecedent.  It 
will  not  usually  happen  that  there  is  any  probable  con 
nection  between  an  antecedent  and  consequent.  Thus 
nitrogen  is  an  antecedent  to  the  lighting  of  a  common 
fire ;  but  it  is  so  far  from  being  a  cause  of  the  lighting, 
that  it  renders  the  combustion  less  active.  Daylight  is 
an  antecedent  to  all  fires  lighted  during  the  day,  but  it 
probably  has  no  appreciable  effect  one  way  or  the  other. 
But  in  the  case  of  any  given  event  it  is  usually  pos 
sible  to  discover  a  certain  number  of  antecedents  which 

0  'Observations  on  the  Nature  and  Tendency  of  the  Doctrine  of 
Mr.  Hume,  concerning  the  Relation  of  Cause  and  Effect.'  Second  ed. 
P-  44-  i  Ibid.  p.  97. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  INDUCTIVE  INFERENCE.  259 

seem  to  be  always  present,  and  with  more  or  less  pro 
bability  we  conclude  that  when  they  exist  the  event  will 
follow. 

Let  it  be  observed  that  the  utmost  latitude  is  at  present 
enjoyed  in  the  use  of  the  term  cause.  Not  only  may  a 
cause  be  an  existent  thing  endowed  with  powers,  as 
oxygen  is  the  cause  of  combustion,  gunpowder  the  cause 
of  explosion,  but  the  very  absence  or  removal  of  a  thing 
may  also  be  a  cause.  It  is  quite  correct  to  speak  of  the 
dryness  of  the  Egyptian  atmosphere,  or  the  absence  of 
moisture,  as  being  the  cause  of  the  preservation  of 
mummies,  and  other  remains  of  antiquity.  The  cause  of 
a  mountain  elevation,  Ingleborough  for  instance,  is  the 
excavation  of  the  surrounding  valleys  by  denudation.  It 
is  not  so  usual  to  speak  of  the  existence  of  a  thing  at  one 
moment  as  the  cause  of  its  existence  at  the  next,  but  to 
me  it  seems  the  commonest  case  of  causation  which  can 
occur.  The  cause  of  motion  of  a  billiard  ball  may  be  the 
stroke  of  another  ball ;  and  recent  philosophy  leads  us  to 
look  upon  all  motions  and  changes,  as  but  so  many  mani 
festations  of  prior  existing  energy.  In  all  probability 
there  is  no  creation  of  energy  and  no  destruction,  so  that  as 
regards  both  mechanical  and  molecular  changes,  the  cause 
is  really  the  manifestation  of  existing  energy.  In  the 
same  way  I  see  not  why  the  prior  existence  of  matter  is 
not  also  a  cause  as  regards  its  subsequent  existence.  All 
science  tends  to  show  us  that  the  existence  of  the  universe 
in  a  particular  state  at  one  moment,  is  the  condition  of  its 
existence  at  the  next  moment,  in  an  apparently  different 
state.  When  we  analyse  the  meaning  which  we  can 
attribute  to  the  word  cause,  it  amounts  to  the  existence  of 
suitable  portions  of  matter  endowed  with  suitable  quan 
tities  of  energy.  If  we  may  accept  Home  Tooke's  asser 
tion,  cause  has  etymologically  the  meaning  of  thing  before. 
Though,  indeed,  the  origin  of  the  word  is  very  obscure,  its 

S    2 


2GO  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

derivatives  the  Italian  cosa,  and  the  French  chose,  mean 
simply  thing.  In  the  German  equivalent  iirsache,  we  have 
plainly  the  original  meaning  of  thing  before,  the  sache 
denoting  'interesting  or  important  object,'  the  English 
sake,  and  ur  being  the  equivalent  of  the  English  ere, 
before*1.  We  abandon,  then,  both  etymology  and  philo 
sophy,  when  we  attribute  to  the  laivs  of  causation  any 
meaning  beyond  that  of  the  conditions  in  which  an  event 
may  be  expected  to  happen,  according  to  our  observation 
of  the  previous  course  of  nature. 

I  have  no  objection  to  use  the  words  cause  and 
causation,  provided  they  are  never  allowed  to  lead  us  to 
imagine  that  our  knowledge  of  nature  can  attain  to  cer 
tainty.  I  repeat  that  if  a  cause  is  an  invariable  and 
necessary  condition  of  an  event,  we  can  never  know 
certainly  whether  the  cause  exists  or  not.  To  us,  then,  a 
cause  is  not  to  be  distinguished  from  the  group  of  positive 
or  negative  conditions  which,  with  more  or  less  probability, 
precede  an  event.  In  this  sense,  there  is  no  particular 
difference  between  knowledge  of  causes  and  our  general 
knowledge  of  the  combinations,  or  succession  of  com 
binations,  in  which  the  phenomena  of  nature  are  presented 
to  us,  or  found  to  occur  in  experimental  inquiry. 

Distinction  of  Inductive  and  Deductive  Results. 

We  must  carefully  avoid  confusing  together  inductive 
investigations  which  terminate  in  the  establishment  of 
general  laws,  and  those  which  seem  to  lead  directly  to 
the  knowledge  of  future  particular  events.  That  process 
only  can  be  called  induction  which  gives  general  laws, 
and  it  is  by  the  subsequent  employment  of  deduction  that 
we  can  alone  anticipate  particular  events.  If  the  ob 
servation  of  a  number  of  cases  shews  that  alloys  of  metals 

11  Leslie,  '  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  of  Heat/  Note  xvi.  p.  521. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  INDUCTIVE  INFERENCE,          261 

fuse  at  lower  temperatures  than  their  constituent  metals, 
I  may  with  more  or  less  probability  draw  a  general  in 
ference  to  that  effect,  and  may  thence  deductively  ascer 
tain  the  probability  that  the  next  alloy  examined  will  fuse 
at  a  lower  temperature  than  its  constituents.  It  has  been 
asserted,  indeed,  by  Mr.  J.  S.  Mill1,  and  partially  admitted 
by  Mr.  Fowler k,  that  we  can  argue  directly  from  case  to 
case,  so  that  what  is  true  of  some  alloys  will  be  true  of 
the  next.  Doubtless,  this  is  the  usual  result  of  our 
reasoning,  regard  being  had  to  degrees  of  probability  ;  but 
these  logicians  fail  entirely  to  give  any  explanation  of  the 
process  by  which  we  get  from  case  to  case.  To  point,  as 
Mr.  Mill  has  done,  to  the  reasoning,  if  such  it  can  be 
called,  of  brute  animals,  is  little  better  than  to  parody 
philosophy1.  It  may  well  be  allowed,  indeed,  that  the 
knowledge  of  future  particular  events  is  one  main  purpose 
of  our  investigations,  and  if  there  were  any  process  of 
thought  by  which  we  could  pass  directly  from  event  to 
event  without  ascending  into  general  truths,  this  method 
would  be  sufficient,  and  certainly  the  most  brief  and 
simple.  It  is  true,  also,  that  the  laws,  of  mental  asso 
ciation  lead  the  mind  always  to  expect  the  like  again  in 
apparently  like  circumstances,  and  even  animals  of  very 
low  intelligence  must  have  some  trace  of  such  powers  of 
association,  serving  to  guide  them  more  or  less  correctly, 
in  the  absence  of  true  reasoning  faculties.  But  it  is  the 
very  purpose  of  logic,  according  to  Mr.  Mill,  to  ascertain 
whether  inferences  have  been  correctly  drawn,  rather  than 
to  discover  themm.  Even  if  we  can,  then,  by  habit, 

i  '  System  of  Logic,'  bk.  II.  chap.  iii.  Mr.  Bain  has  not  adopted  the 
views  of  Mr.  Mill,  on  this  particular  point,  so  far  as  I  can  ascertain.  See 
his  'Inductive  Logic/  p.  i. 

k  'Inductive  Logic,'  pp.  13-14. 

1  'System  of  Logic,'  bk.  II.  chap.  3,  §  3.     Fifth  ed.  pp.  212-213. 

"»  Ibid.,  Introduction,  §  4.     Fifth  ed.  pp.  8-9. 


262  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

association,  or  any  rude  process  of  inference,  infer  the 
future  directly  from  the  past,  it  is  the  work  of  logic  to 
analyse  the  conditions  on  which  the  correctness  of  this 
inference  depends.  Even  Mr.  Mill  would  admit  that  such 
analysis  involves  the  consideration  of  general  truths11,  and 
in  this,  as  in  several  other  important  points,  we  might 
controvert  Mr.  Mill's  own  views  by  his  own  statements. 

On  the  Grounds  of  Inductive  Inference. 

I  hold  that,  in  all  cases  of  inductive  inference,  we  must 
invent  hypotheses,  until  we  fall  upon  some  hypothesis 
which  yields  deductive  results  in  accordance  with  experi 
ence.  Such  accordance  renders  the  chosen  hypothesis 
more  or  less  probable,  and  we  may  then  deduce,  with  some 
degree  of  likelihood,  the  nature  of  our  future  experience,  on 
the  assumption  that  no  arbitrary  change  takes  place  in 
the  conditions  of  nature.  We  can  only  argue  from  the 
past  to  the  future,  on  the  general  principle  set  forth  in  the 
commencement  of  this  work,  that  what  is  true  of  a  thing 
will  be  true  of  the  like.  So  far  then  as  one  object  or 
event  differs  from  another,  all  inference  is  impossible  ; 
particulars  as  particulars  can  no  more  make  an  inference 
than  grains  of  sand  can  make  a  rope.  We  must  always 
rise  to  something  which  is  general  or  same  in  the  cases, 
and  assuming  that  sameness  to  be  extended  to  new  cases 
we  learn  their  nature.  Hearing  a  clock  tick  five  thousand 
times  without  exception  or  variation,  we  adopt  the  very 
probable  hypothesis  that  there  is  some  invariably  acting 
machine  which  produces  those  uniform  sounds,  and  which 
will,  in  the  absence  of  change,  go  on  producing  them. 
Meeting  twenty  times  with  a  bright  yellow  ductile  sub 
stance,  and  finding  it  to  be  always  very  heavy  and  in 
corrodible,  I  infer  that  there  was  some  natural  condition, 

n  '  System  of  Logic,'  bk.  II.  chap.  iii.  §  5.  pp.  225,  &c. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  INDUCTIVE  INFERENCE.        263 

which  tended,  in  the  creation  of  things,  to  associate  these 
properties  together,  and  I  expect  to  find  them  associated 
in  the  next  instance.  But  there  always  is  the  possibility 
that  some  unknown  change  may  take  place  between  past 
and  future  cases.  The  clock  may  run  down,  or  be  subject 
to  any  one  of  a  hundred  accidents  altering  its  condition. 
There  is  no  reason  in  the  nature  of  things,  so  far  as  known 
to  us,  why  yellow  colour,  ductility,  high  specific  gravity, 
and  incorrodibility,  should  always  be  associated  together ; 
and  in  other  like  cases,  if  not  in  this,  men's  expectations 
have  been  deceived.  Our  inferences,  therefore,  always 
retain  more  or  less  of  a  hypothetical  character,  and  are  so 
far  open  to  doubt.  Only  in  proportion  as  our  induction 
approximates  to  the  character  of  perfect  induction,  does 
it  approximate  to  certainty.  The  amount  of  uncertainty 
corresponds  to  the  probability  that  other  objects  than 
those  examined,  may  exist  and  falsify  our  inferences  ;  the 
amount  of  probability  corresponds  to  the  amount  of  infor 
mation  yielded  by  our  examination  ;  and  the  theory  of 
probability  will  be  needed  to  prevent  our  over-estimating 
or  under-estimating  the  knowledge  we  possess. 

Illustrations  of  the  Inductive  Process. 

To  illustrate  the  passage  from  the  known  to  the  ap 
parently  unknown,  let  us  suppose  that  the  phenomena 
under  investigation  consist  of  numbers,  and  that  the 
following  six  numbers  being  exhibited  to  us,  we  are 
required  to  infer  the  character  of  the  next  in  the 
series  : — 

5,   15,   35,  45,  65,   95. 

The  question  first  of  all  arises,  How  may  we  describe  this 
series  of  numbers  ?  What  is  uniformly  true  of  them  ? 
The  reader  cannot  fail  to  perceive  at  the  first  glance  that 
they  all  end  in  five,  and  the  problem  is,  from  the  proper- 


264  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

ties  of  these  six  numbers,  to  infer  the  properties  of  the 
next  number  ending  in  five.  If  we  proceed  to  test  their 
properties  by  the  process  of  perfect  induction,  we  soon 
perceive  that  they  have  another  common  property,  namely 
that  of  being  divisible  by  jive  without  remainder.  May 
we  then  assert  that  the  next  number  ending  in  five  is  also 
divisible  by  five,  and,  if  so,  upon  what  grounds  1  Or 
extending  the  question,  Is  every  number  ending  in  five 
divisible  by  five  1  Does  it  follow  that  because  six  num 
bers  obey  a  supposed  law,  therefore  376,685,975  or  any 
other  number,  however  large,  obeys  the  law  r(  I  answer 
certainly  not.  The  law  in  question  is  undoubtedly  true  ; 
but  its  truth  is  not  proved  by  any  finite  number  of  exam 
ples.  All  that  these  six  numbers  can  do,  is  to  suggest  to 
my  mind  the  possible  existence  of  such  a  law  ;  and  I  then 
ascertain  its  truth,  by  proving  deductively  from  the  rules 
of  decimal  numeration,  that  any  number  ending  in  five 
must  be  made  up  of  multiples  of  five,  and  must  therefore 
be  itself  a  multiple. 

To  make  this  more  plain,  let  the  reader  now  examine 
the  numbers— 

7,    i7>    37>   47>   67,   97. 

They  all  obviously  end  in  7  instead  of  5,  and  though  not 
at  equal  intervals,  the  intervals  are  exactly  the  same  as  in 
the  previous  case.  After  a  little  consideration,  the  reader 
will  perceive  that  these  numbers  all  agree  in  being  prime 
numbers,  or  multiples  of  unity  only.  May  we  then  infer 
that  the  next,  or  any  other  number  ending  in  7,  is  a 
prime  number '{  Clearly  not,  for  on  trial  we  find  that 
27,  57,  117  are  not  primes.  Six  instances,  then,  treated 
empirically,  lead  us  to  a  true  and  universal  law  in  one 
case,  and  mislead  us  in  another  case.  We  ought,  in  fact 
to  have  no  confidence  in  any  law  until  we  have  treated  it 
deductively,  and  have  shown  that  from  the  conditions 
supposed  the  results  expected  must  ensue.  From  the 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  INDUCTIVE  INFERENCE.         265 

principles   of  number,  no    one    can   show   that   numbers 
ending  in  7  should  be  primes. 

From  the  history  of  the  theory  of  numbers  some  good 
examples  of  false  induction  can  be  adduced.  Taking  the 
following  series  of  prime  numbers 

41,  43,  47,  53,  61,  71,  83,  97,  113,  131,  151,  &c., 
it  will  be  found  that  they  all  agree  in  being  values  of 
the  general  expression  x2  +  x  +  4 1 ,  putting  for  x  in  succes 
sion  the  values,  o,  i,  2,  3,  4,  &c.  We  thus  seem  always 
to  obtain  a  prime  number,  and  the  induction  is  apparently 
very  strong,  to  the  effect  that  this  expression  always  will 
give  primes.  Yet  a  few  more  trials  will  disprove  this  false 
conclusion.  Put  x  =  40,  and  we  obtain  40  x  40  +  40  +  41, 
or  41  x  4 1 .  Now  such  a  failure  could  never  have  hap 
pened,  had  we  shown  any  deductive  reason  why  x2  +  x  +  4 1 
should  give  primes. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  what  here  happens  with 
forty  instances,  might  happen  with  forty  thousand  or 
forty  million  instances.  An  apparent  law  never  once 
failing  up  to  a  certain  point  may  then  suddenly  break 
down,  so  that  inductive  reasoning,  as  it  has  been  described 
by  some  writers,  can  give  no  sure  knowledge  of  what  is  to 
come.  Mr.  Babbage  admirably  pointed  out,  in  his  Ninth 
Bridgewater  Treatise,  that  a  machine  could  be  constructed 
to  give  a  perfectly  regular  series  of  numbers,  through 
a  vast  series  of  steps,  and  yet  to  break  the  law  of  progres 
sion  suddenly  at  any  required  point.  No  number  of 
particular  cases  as  particulars  enables  us  to  pass  by 
inference  to  any  new  case.  It  is  hardly  needful  to  inquire 
here  what  can  be  inferred  from  an  infinite  series  of  facts, 
because  they  are  never  practically  within  our  power  ;  but 
we  may  unhesitatingly  accept  the  conclusion,  that  no 
finite  number  of  instances  can  ever  prove  a  general  law, 
or  can  give  us  sure  knowledge  of  even  one  other  instance. 

General  mathematical  theorems  have  indeed  been  dis- 


266  THE  PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

covered  by  the  observation  of  particular  cases,  and  may 
again  be  so  discovered.     We  have  Newton's  own  state- 

o 

ment,  to  the  effect  that  he  was  thus  led  to  the  all-impor 
tant  Binomial  Theorem,  the  basis  of  the  whole  structure 
of  mathematical  analysis.  Speaking  of  a  certain  series  of 
terms,  expressing  the  area  of  a  circle  or  hyperbola,  he  says, 
'I  reflected  that  the  denominators  were  in  arithmetical 
progression ;  so  that  only  the  numerical  co-efficients  of 
the  numerators  remained  to  be  investigated.  But  these, 
in  the  alternate  areas,  were  the  figures  of  the  powers  of 
the  number  eleven,  namely  1 1°,  1 11,  1 12,  1 13,  1 14 ;  that  is, 
in  the  first  i  ;  in  the  second  i,  i  ;  in  the  third  i,  2,  i  ;  in 
the  fourth  i,  3,  3,  i  ;  in  the  fifth  i,  4,  6,  4,  i.°  I  inquired, 
therefore,  in  what  manner  all  the  remaining  figures  could 
be  found  from  the  first  two  ;  and  I  found  that  if  the  first 
figure  be  called  m,  all  the  rest  could  be  found  by  the 
continual  multiplication  of  the  terms  of  the  formula 

ni—o  m—i  in— 2  m—^ 

X        X     X  X     &c.  P 

1234 

It  is  pretty  evident,  from  this  most  interesting  statement, 
that  Newton  having  simply  observed  the  succession  of  the 
numbers,  tried  various  formula?  until  he  found  one  which 
agreed  with  them  all.  He  was  so  little  satisfied  with  this 
process,  however,  that  he  verified  particular  results  of  his 
new  theorem  by  comparison  with  the  results  of  common 
multiplication,  and  the  rule  for  the  extraction  of  the 
square  root.  Newton,  in  fact,  gave  no  demonstration  of 
his  theorem ;  and  a  number  of  the  first  mathematicians 
of  the  last  century,  James  Bernouilli,  Maclaurin,  Landen, 
Euler,  Lagrange,  &c.,  occupied  themselves  with  discovering 
a  conclusive  method  of  deductive  proof. 

0  These  are  the  figurate  numbers  considered  in  pages  206-216. 

P  '  Commercium  Epistolicum.  Epistola  ad  Oldenburgum,'  Oct.  24, 
1676.  Horsley's  '"Works  of  Newton',  vol.  iv.  p.  541.  See  De  Morgan 
in  'Penny  Cyclopaedia',  art.  Binomial  TJworem,  p.  412. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  INDUCTIVE  INFERENCE.          267 

Sir  George  Airy  has  also  recorded  a  curious  case,  in 
which  he  accidentally  fell  by  trial  on  a  new  geometrical 
property  of  the  sphered  Many  of  the  most  important  and 
now  trivial  propositions  in  geometry,  were  probably  thus 
discovered  by  the  ancient  Greek  geometers  ;  and  we  have 
pretty  clear  evidence  of  this  in  the  Commentaries  of 
Proclus.r  But  discovery  in  such  cases  means  nothing 
more  than  suggestion,  and  it  is  always  by  pure  deduction 
that  the  general  law  is  really  established.  As  Proclus 
puts  it,  we  must  pass  from  sense  to  consideration. 

Given,  for  instance,  the  series  of  figures  in  the  accom 
panying  diagram,  a  little  examination  and  measurement 
will  show  that  the  curv 
ed  lines  approximate  to 
semicircles,  and  the  rec 
tilineal  figures  to  right- 
angled  triangles.  These 
figures  may  seem  to  sug 
gest  to  the  mind  the  gen 
eral  law  that  angles  in 
scribed  in  semicircles  are  right  angles  ;  but  no  number  of 
instances,  and  no  possible  accuracy  of  measurement  would 
really  establish  the  truth  of  that  general  law.  Availing 
ourselves  of  the  suggestion  furnished  by  the  figures,  we 
can  only  investigate  deductively  the  consequences  which 
flow  from  the  definition  of  a  circle,  until  we  discover 
among  them  the  property  of  containing  right  angles. 
Many  persons,  after  much  labour,  have  thought  that  they 
had  discovered  a  method  of  trisecting  angles  by  plane 
geometrical  construction,  because  a  certain  complex  ar 
rangement  of  lines  and  circles  had  appeared  to  trisect  an 
angle  in  every  case  tried  by  them,  and  they  inferred,  by  a 

<i  'Philosophical  Transactions/  [1866]  vol.  146,  p.  334. 
r  Bk.  ii.  chap.  iv. 


268  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

supposed  act  of  induction,  that  it  would  succeed  in  all 
other  cases.  Professor  de  Morgan  has  recorded  a  proposed 
mode  of  trisecting  the  angle  which  could  not  be  dis 
criminated  by  the  senses  from  a  true  general  solution, 
except  when  it  was  applied  to  very  obtuse  angles.3  In 
all  such  cases,  it  has  always  turned  out  either  that  the 
angle  was  not  trisected  at  all,  or  that  only  certain 
particular  angles  could  be  thus  trisected.  They  were 
misled  by  some  apparent  or  special  coincidence,  and  only 
deductive  proof  could  establish  the  truth  and  generality 
of  the  result.  In  this  case,  deductive  proof  shows  that  the 
problem,  as  attempted,  is  impossible,  and  that  angles 
generally  cannot  be  trisected  by  common  geometrical 
methods. 


Geometrical  Reasoning. 

This  view  of  the  matter  is  strongly  supported  by  the 
further  consideration  of  geometrical  reasoning.  No  skill 
and  care  could  ever  enable  us  to  verify  absolutely  any  one 
geometrical  proposition.  Rousseau,  in  his  Emile?  tells  us 
that  we  should  teach  a  child  geometry  by  causing  him  to 
measure  and  compare  figures  by  superposition.  While  a 
child  was  yet  incapable  of  general  reasoning,  this  would 
doubtless  be  an  instructive  exercise  ;  but  it  never  could 
teach  geometry,  nor  prove  the  truth  of  any  one  proposition. 
All  our  figures  are  rude  approximations,  and  they  may 
happen  to  seem  unequal  when  they  should  be  equal, 
and  equal  when  they  should  be  unequal.  Moreover, 
figures  may  from  chance  be  equal  in  case  after  case,  and 
yet  there  may  be  no  general  reason  why  they  should  be 
so.  The  results  of  deductive  geometrical  reasoning  are 

s  'Budget  of  Paradoxes,'  p.  257. 

t   i2mo.  Amsterdam,  1762,  vol.  i.  p.  401. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  INDUCTIVE  INFERENCE.         269 

absolutely  certain,  and  are  either  exactly  true  or  capable 
of  being  carried  to  any  required  degree  of  approximation. 
In  a  perfect  triangle,  the  angles  must  be  equal  to  one  half- 
revolution  precisely  ;  even  an  infinitesimal  divergence 
would  be  impossible  ;  and  I  believe  with  equal  confidence, 
that  however  many  are  the  angles  of  a  figure,  provided 
there  are  no  re-entrant  angles,  the  sum  of  the  angles  will 
be  precisely  and  absolutely  equal  to  twice  as  many  right- 
angles  as  the  figure  has  sides,  less  by  four  right-angles. 
In  such  cases,  the  deductive  proof  is  absolute  and  com 
plete  ;  empirical  verification  can  at  the  most  guard  against 
accidental  oversights. 

There  is  a  second  class  of  geometrical  truths  which  can 
only  be  proved  by  approximation  ;  but,  as  the  mind  sees 
no  reason  why  that  approximation  should  not  always  go 
on,  we  arrive  at  complete  conviction.  We  thus  learn  that 
the  surface  of  a  sphere  is  equal  exactly  to  two-thirds  of 
the  whole  surface  of  the  circumscribing  cylinder,  or  to  four 
times  the  area  of  the  generating  circle.  The  area  of  a 
parabola  is  exactly  two-thirds  of  that  of  the  circumscribing 
parallelogram.  The  area  of  the  cycloid  is  exactly  three 
times  that  of  the  generating  circle.  These  are  truths  that 
we  could  never  ascertain,  nor  even  verify  by  observation  ; 
for  any  finite  amount  of  difference,  vastly  less  than  what 
the  senses  can  discern,  would  falsify  them.  There  are 
again  geometrical  relations  which  we  cannot  assign  ex 
actly,  but  can  carry  to  any  desirable  degree  of  approxi 
mation.  Thus,  the  ratio  of  the  circumference  to  the 
diameter  of  a  circle  is  that  of  3' 14159265358979323846.... 
to  i,  and  the  approximation  may  be  carried  to  any  ex 
tent  by  the  expenditure  of  sufficient  labour,  as  many  as  607 
places  of  figures  having  been  calculated."  Some  years  since, 
I  amused  myself  by  trying  how  near  I  could  get  to  this 
ratio,  by  the  careful  use  of  compasses,  and  I  did  not  come 

"  '  English  Cyclopaedia/  art.  Tabhs. 


270  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

nearer  than  i  part  in  540.  We  might  imagine  measure 
ments  so  accurately  executed  as  to  give  us  eight  or  ten 
places  correctly.  But  the  power  of  the  hands  and  senses 
must  soon  stop,  whereas  the  mental  powers  of  deductive 
reasoning  can  proceed  to  an  unlimited  degree  of  approxi 
mation.  Geometrical  truths,  then,  are  incapable  of  verifi 
cation  ;  and,  if  so,  they  cannot  even  be  learnt  by  observa 
tion.  How  can  I  have  learnt  by  observation  a  proposition 
of  which  I  cannot  even  prove  the  truth  by  observation, 
when  I  am  in  possession  of  it  \  All  that  observation  or 
empirical  trial  can  do  is  to  suggest  propositions,  of  which 
the  truth  may  afterwards  be  proved  deductively.  By 
drawing  a  number  of  right-angled  triangles  on  paper, 
with  squares  upon  their  sides,  and  cutting  out  and 
weighing  these  squares  very  accurately,  I  might  have 
reason  to  suspect  the  existence  of  the  relation  of  equality 
proved  in  Euclid's  47th  Proposition ;  but  no  process  of 
weighing  or  measuring  could  ever  prove  it,  nor  could  it 
ever  assure  me  that  the  like  degree  of  approximation 
would  exist  in  untried  cases. 

Much  has  been  said  about  the  peculiar  certainty  of 
mathematical  reasoning,  but  it  is  only  certainty  of  deduc 
tive  reasoning,  and  equal  certainty  attaches  to  all  correct 
logical  deduction.  If  a  triangle  be  right-angled,  the 
square  on  the  hypothenuse  will  undoubtedly  equal  the 
sum  of  the  two  squares  on  the  other  sides  ;  but  I  can 
never  be  sure  that  a  triangle  is  right-angled  :  so  I  can  be 
certain  that  nitric  acid  will  not  dissolve  gold,  provided  I 
know  that  the  substances  employed  really  correspond  to 
those  on  which  I  tried  the  experiment  previously.  Here 
is  like  certainty  of  inference,  and  like  doubt  as  to  the 
facts. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  INDUCTIVE  INFERENCE.          271 


Discrimination  of  Certainty  and  Probability  in  the 
Inductive  Process. 

We  can  never  recur  too  often  to  the  truth  that  our 
knowledge  of  the  laws  and  future  events  of  the  external 
world  is  only  probable.  The  mind  itself  is  quite  capable 
of  possessing  certain  knowledge,  and  it  is  well  to  discri 
minate  carefully  between  what  we  can  and  cannot  know 
with  certainty.  In  the  first  place,  whatever  feeling  is 
actually  present  to  the  mind  is  certainly  known  to  that 
mind.  If  I  see  blue  sky,  I  may  be  quite  sure  that  I 
do  experience  the  sensation  of  blueness.  Whatever  I  do 
feel,  I  do  feel  beyond  all  doubt.  We  are  indeed  very 
likely  to  confuse  what  we  really  feel  with  what  we  are 
inclined  to  associate  with  it,  or  infer  inductively  from 
it;  but  the  whole  of  our  consciousness,  as  far  as  it  is 
the  result  of  pure  intuition  arid  free  from  inference,  is 
certain  knowledge  beyond  all  doubt. 

In  the  second  place,  we  may  have  certainty  of  inference  ; 
the  first  axiom  of  Euclid,  the  fundamental  laws  of  thought, 
and  the  rule  of  substitution  (p.  u),  are  certainly  true; 
and  if  my  senses  could  inform  me  that  A  was  indistin 
guishable  in  colour  from  B,  and  B  from  C,  then  I  should 
be  equally  certain  that  A  was  indistinguishable  from  C. 
In  short,  whatever  truth  there  is  in  the  premises,  I  can 
certainly  embody  in  their  correct  logical  result.  But 
practically  the  certainty  generally  assumes  a  hypothetical 
character.  I  never  can  be  quite  sure  that  two  colours 
are  exactly  alike,  that  two  magnitudes  are  exactly  equal, 
or  that  two  bodies  whatsoever  are  identical  even  in  their 
apparent  qualities.  Almost  all  our  judgments  involve 
quantitative  relations,  and,  as  will  be  shown  in  succeeding 
chapters,  we  can  never  attain  exactness  and  certainty 
where  continuous  quantity  enters.  Judgments  concerning 


272  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

discontinuous  quantity  or  numbers,  however,  allow  of  cer 
tainty  ;  for  I  may  establish  beyond  doubt,  for  instance,  that 
the  difference  of  the  squares  of  17  and  13  is  the  product 
of  17  +  13  and  17-13,  and  is  therefore  30  x  4,  or  120. 

Inferences  which  we  draw  concerning  natural  objects 
are  never  certain  except  in  a  hypothetical  point  of 
view.  It  might  seem,  indeed,  to  be  certain  that  iron  is 
magnetic,  or  that  gold  is  incapable  of  solution  in  nitric 
acid ;  but,  if  we  carefully  investigate  the  meanings  of 
these  statements,  they  will  be  found  to  involve  no  cer 
tainty  but  that  of  consciousness  and  that  of  hypothetical 
inference.  For  what  do  I  mean  by  iron  or  gold  ?  If  I 
choose  a  remarkable  piece  of  yellow  substance,  call  it 
gold,  and  then  immerse  it  in  a  liquid  which  I  call  nitric 
acid,  and  find  that  there  is  no  change  called  solution, 
then  consciousness  has  certainly  informed  me  that  with 
my  meaning  of  the  terms,  '  Gold  is  insoluble  in  nitric 
acid.'  I  may  further  be  certain  of  something  else  ;  for  if 
this  gold  and  nitric  acid  remain  what  they  were,  I  may  be 
sure  there  will  be  no  solution  on  again  trying  the  experi 
ment.  If  I  take  other  portions  of  gold  and  nitric  acid, 
and  am  sure  that  they  really  are  identical  in  properties 
with  the  former  portions,  I  can  be  certain  that  there  will 
be  no  solution.  But  at  this  point  my  knowledge  becomes 
purely  hypothetical ;  for  how  can  I  be  sure  without  trial 
that  the  gold  and  acid  are  really  identical  in  nature  with 
what  I  formerly  called  gold  and  nitric  acid.  How  do 
I  know  gold  when  I  see  it  \  If  I  judge  by  the  appa 
rent  qualities — colour,  ductility,  specific  gravity,  &c.,  I 
may  be  misled,  because  there  may  always  exist  a  sub 
stance  which  to  the  colour,  ductility,  specific  gravity,  and 
other  specified  qualities,  joins  others  which  we  do  not 
expect.  Similarly,  if  iron  is  magnetic,  as  shown  by  an 
experiment  with  objects  answering  to  those  names,  then 
all  iron  is  magnetic,  meaning  all  pieces  of  matter  identical 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  INDUCTIVE  INFERENCE.          273 

with  my  assumed  piece.  But  in  trying  to  identify  iron,  I 
am  always  open  to  mistake.  Nor  is  this  liability  to  mis 
take  a  matter  of  speculation  only  v. 

The  history  of  chemistry  shows  that  the  most  confident 
inferences  may  have  been  falsified  by  the  confusion  of  one 
substance  with  another.  Thus  strontia  was  never  discri 
minated  from  baryta  until  Klaproth  and  Haiiy  detected 
differences  between  some  of  their  properties  x.  Accordingly 
chemists  must  often  have  inferred  concerning  strontia 
what  was  only  true  of  baryta,  and  vice  versd.  There  is 
now  no  doubt  that  the  recently  discovered  substances, 
coesium  and  rubidium  were  long  mistaken  for  potassiumv. 
Other  elements  have  often  been  confused  together,  for 
instance,  tantalum  and  niobium  ;  sulphur  and  selenium ; 
cerium,  lanthanum,  and  didymium  ;  yttrium  and  erbium. 

Even  the  best-established  laws  of  physical  science  do 
not  exclude  false  inference.  No  law  of  nature  has  been 
better  established  than  that  of  universal  gravitation,  and 
we  believe  with  the  utmost  confidence  that  any  body 
capable  of  affecting  the  senses  will  attract  other  bodies, 
and  fall  to  the  earth  if  not  prevented.  Euler  remarks 
that,  although  he  had  never  made  trial  of  the  stones 
which  compose  the  church  of  Magdeburg,  yet  he  had 
not  the  least  doubt  that  all  of  them  were  heavy,  and 
would  fall  if  unsupported.  But  he  adds,  that  it  would 
be  extremely  difficult  to  give  any  satisfactory  explanation 
of  this  confident  belief2.  The  fact  is,  that  the  belief  ought 
not  to  amount  to  certainty  until  the  experiment  has  been 
tried,  and  in  the  meantime  a  slight  amount  of  uncer- 

v  Professor   Bowen   has    excellently    stated    this    view.     '  Treatise  on 
Logic.'     Cambridge,  U.S.A.,  1866.     P.  354. 

x  Whewell's  'History  of  the  Inductive  Sciences,'  vol.  iii.  p.  174. 

y  Hoscoe's  'Spectrum  Analysis/  ist  edit.  p.  99. 

z  Euler's    '  Letters    to    a    German    Princess,'    translated   by    Hunter. 
2nd  ed.  vol.  ii.  pp.  17-18. 

T 


274  THE  PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

tainty  enters,  because  we  cannot  be  sure  that  the  stones  of 
the  Magdeburg  church  resemble  other  stones  in  all  their 
properties. 

In  like  manner,  not  one  of  the  inductive  truths  which 
men  have  established,  or  think  they  have  established,  is 
really  safe  from  exception  or  reversal.  Lavoisier,  when 
laying  the  foundations  of  chemistry,  met  with  so  many 
instances  tending  to  show  the  existence  of  oxygen  in 
all  acids,  that  he  adopted  a  general  conclusion  to  that 
effect,  and  devised  the  name  oxygen  accordingly.  He 
entertained  no  appreciable  doubt  that  the  acid  existing 
in  sea  salt  also  contained  oxygen a  ;  yet  subsequent  ex 
perience  falsified  his  expectations. 

This  instance  refers  to  a  science  in  its  infancy,  speaking 
relatively  to  the  possible  achievements  of  men.  But  all 
sciences  are  and  will  ever  remain  in  their  infancy,  relatively 
to  the  extent  and  complexity  of  the  universe  which  they 
undertake  to  investigate.  Euler  expresses  no  more  than 
the  truth  when  he  says  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  fix 
on  any  one  thing  really  existing,  of  which  we  could  have 
so  perfect  a  knowledge  as  to  put  us  beyond  the  reach  of 
mistake  b. 

Like  remarks  may  be  made  concerning  all  other  in 
ductive  inferences.  We  may  be  quite  certain  that  a  comet 
will  go  on  moving  in  a  similar  path  if  all  circumstances 
remain  the  same  as  before  ;  but  if  we  leave  out  this  exten 
sive  qualification,  our  predictions  will  always  be  subject 
to  the  chance  of  falsification  by  some  wholly  unexpected 
event,  such  as  the  division  of  Biela's  comet,  or  the  un 
foreseen  interference  of  some  planetary  or  other  gravitating 
body. 

Inductive  inference  might   attain  to    certainty  if  our 

a  Lavoisier's  'Chemistry/  translated  by  Kerr.     3rd  edit.  pp.  114,  121, 
I23-  b  Euler's  'Letters,'  vol.  ii.  p.  21. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  INDUCTIVE  INFERENCE.          275 

knowledge  of  the  agents  existing  throughout  the  universe 
were  complete,  and  if  we  were  at  the  same  time  certain 
that  the  same  Power  which  created  the  universe  would 
allow  it  to  proceed  without  arbitrary  change.  There  is 
always  a  possibility  of  causes  being  in  existence  without 
our  knowledge,  and  these  may  at  any  moment  produce 
an  unexpected  effect.  Even  when  by  the  theory  of  pro 
babilities  \ve  succeed  in  forming  some  notion  of  the  com 
parative  confidence  with  which  we  should  receive  in 
ductive  results,  it  yet  appears  to  me  that  we  must  make 
an  assumption.  Events  come  out  like  balls  from  the  vast 
ballot-box  of  nature,  and  close  observation  will  enable  us 
to  form  some  notion,  as  we  shall  see  in  the  next  chapter, 
of  the  contents  of  that  ballot-box.  But  we  must  still 
assume  that  between  the  time  of  an  observation  and  that 
to  which  our  inferences  relate,  no  change  in  the  ballot-box 
shall  have  been  made. 


T  2 


CHAPTER   XII. 

THE   INDUCTIVE    OK   INVERSE   APPLICATION    OF    THE 
THEORY   OF   PROBABILITIES. 

WE  have  hitherto  considered  the  theory  of  probability 
only  in  its  simple  deductive  employment,  by  which  it 
enables  us  to  determine  from  given  conditions  the  probable 
character  of  events  happening  under  those  conditions. 
But  as  deductive  reasoning  when  inversely  applied  con 
stitutes  the  process  of  induction,  so  the  calculation  of 
probabilities  may  be  inversely  applied  ;  from  the  known 
character  of  certain  events  we  may  argue  backwards  to 
the  probability  of  a  certain  law  or  condition  governing 
those  events.  Having  satisfactorily  accomplished  this 
work,  we  may  indeed  calculate  forwards  to  the  probable 
character  of  future  events  happening  under  the  same  con 
ditions  ;  but  this  part  of  the  process  is  a  direct  use  of 
deductive  reasoning  (p.  260). 

Now  it  is  highly  instructive  to  find  that  whether  the 
theory  of  probabilities  be  deductively  or  inductively  ap 
plied,  the  calculation  is  always  performed  according  to 
the  principles  and  rules  of  deduction.  The  probability 
that  an  event  has  a  particular  condition  entirely  depends 
upon  the  probability  that  if  the  condition  existed  the 
event  would  follow.  If  we  take  up  a  pack  of  common 
playing  cards,  and  observe  that  they  are  arranged  in  per 
fect  numerical  order,  we  conclude  beyond  all  reasonable 
doubt  that  they  have  been  thus  intentionally  arranged 


THE  INDUCTIVE  OR  INVERSE  METHOD.  277 

by  some  person  acquainted  with  the  usual  order  of 
sequence.  This  conclusion  is  quite  irresistible,  and  rightly 
so  ;  for  there  are  but  two  suppositions  which  we  can  make 
as  to  the  reason  of  the  cards  being  in  that  particular 
order  :— 

1.  They  have  been  intentionally  arranged  by  some  one 
who  would  probably  prefer  the  numerical  order. 

2.  They  have  fallen  into  that  order  by  chance,  that  is, 
by  some  series  of  conditions  which,  being  wholly  unknown 
in  nature,  cannot  be  known  to  lead  by  preference  to  the 
particular  order  in  question. 

The  latter  supposition  is  by  no  means  absurd,  for  any 
one  order  is  as  likely  as  any  other  when  there  is  no  prepon 
derating  tendency.  But  we  can  readily  calculate  by  the 
doctrines  of  permutation  the  probability  that  fifty-two 
objects  would  fall  by  chance  into  any  one  particular  order. 
Fifty-two  objects  can  be  arranged  in— 

52x5ix5Ox  ....  x4x3x2xi  or  8066  x  (io)64 
possible  orders,  the  number  obtained  requiring  68  places 
of  figures  for  its  full  expression.  Hence  it  is  excessively 
unlikely,  and,  in  fact,  practically  impossible,  that  any  one 
should  ever  meet  with  a  pack  of  cards  arranged  in  perfect 
order  by  pure  accident.  If  we  do  meet  with  a  pack  so 
arranged,  we  inevitably  adopt  the  other  supposition,  that 
some  person  having  reasons  for  preferring  that  special 
order,  has  thus  put  them  together. 

We  know  that  of  the  almost  infinite  number  of  possible 
orders  the  numerical  order  is  the  most  remarkable  ;  it  is 
useful  as  proving  the  perfect  constitution  of  the  pack,  and 
it  is  the  intentional  result  of  certain  games.  At  any  rate, 
the  probability  that  intention  should  produce  that  order  is 
incomparably  greater  than  the  probability  that  chance 
should  produce  it;  and  as  a  certain  pack  exists  in  that 
order,  we  rightly  prefer  the  supposition  which  most 
probably  leads  to  the  observed  result. 


278  THE   PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

By  a  similar  mode  of  reasoning  we  every  day  arrive, 
and  validly  arrive,  at  conclusions  approximating  to  cer 
tainty.  Whenever  we  observe  a  perfect  resemblance 
between  two  objects,  as,  for  instance,  two  printed  pages, 
two  engravings,  two  coins,  two  foot-prints,  we  are  warranted 
in  asserting  that  they  proceed  from  the  same  type,  the 
same  plate,  the  same  pair  of  dies,  or  the  same  boot.  And 
why  ?  Because  it  is  almost  impossible  that  with  different 
types,  plates,  dies,  or  boots  some  minute  distinction  of 
form  should  not  be  discovered.  It  is  barely  possible  for 
the  hand  of  the  most  skilful  artist  to  make  two  objects 
alike,  so  that  mechanical  repetition  is  the  only  probable 
explanation  of  exact  similarity.  We  can  often  establish 
with  extreme  probability  that  one  document  is  copied 
from  another.  Suppose  that  each  document  contains 
10,000  words,  and  that  the  same  word  is  incorrectly 
spelt  in  each.  There  is  then  a  probability  of  less  than 
i  in  10,000  that  the  same  mistake  should  be  made  in 
each. 

If  we  meet  with  a  second  error  occurring  in  each  docu- 

O 

ment,  the  probability  is  less  than  i  in  10,000  x  9999,  that 
such  two  coincidences  should  occur  by  chance,  and  the 
numbers  grow  with  extreme  rapidity  for  more  numerous 
coincidences.  We  cannot  indeed  make  any  precise  calcu 
lations  without  taking  into  account  the  character  of  the 
errors  committed,  concerning  the  conditions  of  which  we 
have  no  accurate  means  of  estimating  probabilities. 
Nevertheless,  abundant  evidence  may  thus  be  obtained 
as  to  the  derivation  of  documents  from  each  other.  In 
the  examination  of  many  sets  of  logarithmic  tables,  six 
remarkable  errors  were  found  to  be  present  in  all  but 
two,  and  it  was  proved  that  tables  printed  at  Paris,  Berlin, 
Florence,  Avignon,  and  even  in  China,  besides  thirteen 
sets  printed  in  England,  between  the  years  1633  and 
1822,  were  derived  directly  or  indirectly  from  some 


THE  INDUCTIVE  OR  INVERSE  METHOD.  279 

common  source a.  With  a  certain  amount  of  labour,  it 
is  possible  to  establish  beyond  reasonable  doubt  the  rela 
tionship  or  genealogy  of  any  number  of  copies  of  one 
document,  proceeding  possibly  from  parent  copies  now 
lost.  Tischendorf  has  thus  investigated  the  relations 
between  the  manuscripts  of  the  New  Testament  now 
existing,  and  the  same  work  has  been  performed  by 
German  scholars  for  several  classical  writings. 

Principle  of  the  Inverse  Method. 

The  inverse  application  of  the  rules  of  probability 
entirely  depends  upon  a  proposition  which  may  be  thus 
stated,  nearly  in  the  words  of  Laplace b.  If  an  event  can 
be  produced  by  any  one  of  a  certain  number  of  different 
causes,  the  probabilities  of  the  existence  of  these  causes  as 
inferred  from  the  event,  are  proportional  to  the  proba 
bilities  of  the  event  as  derived  from  these  causes.  In  other 
words,  the  most  probable  cause  of  an  event  which  has 
happened  is  that  which  would  most  probably  lead  to  the 
event  supposing  the  cause  to  exist ;  but  all  other  possible 
causes  are  also  to  be  taken  into  account  with  probabilities 
proportional  to  the  probability  that  the  event  would  have 
happened  if  the  cause  existed.  Suppose,  to  fix  our  ideas 
clearly,  that  E  is  the  event,  and  Cj  C2  C3  are  the  three 
only  conceivable  causes.  If  Cx  exist,  the  probability  is  pl 
that  E  would  follow  ;  if  C2  and  C3  exist,  the  like  pro 
babilities  are  respectively  p2  and  p3.  Then  as  p±  is  top.z,  so 
is  the  probability  of  d  being  the  actual  cause  to  the 
probability  of  C2  being  it ;  and,  similarly,  as  p.2  is  to  p3,  so 
is  the  probability  of  C2  being  the  actual  cause  to  the 
probability  of  C3  being  it.  By  a  very  simple  mathematical 

a  Lardner,  'Edinburgh  Review/  July  1834,  p.  277. 
b  '  Mcmoires  par  clivers  Savans,'  torn.  vi. ;  quoted  by  Todliunter  in  his 
'  History  of  Theory  of  Probability,'  p.  458. 


280  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

process  we  arrive  at  the  conclusion  that  the  actual  pro 
bability  of  C,  being  the  cause  is 


Pi  +  P*  +  P3 
and  the  similar  probabilities  of  the  existence  of  C2  and 


1\  +  P2+  1>3  1\  +  P,  +  P3 

The  sum  of  these  three  fractions  amounts  to  unity,  which 
correctly  expresses  the  certainty  that  one  cause  or  other 
must  be  in  o*peration. 

We  may  thus  state  the  result  in  general  language. 
If  it  is  certain  that  one  or  other  of  the  supposed  causes 
exists,  the  probability  that  any  one  does  exist  is  the 
probability  that  if  it  exists  the  event  happens,  divided  by 
the  sum  of  all  the  similar  probabilities.  There  ir.ay  seem 
to  be  an  intricacy  in  this  subject  which  may  prove  dis 
tasteful  to  some  readers  ;  but  this  intricacy  is  essential 
to  the  subject  in  hand.  No  one  can  possibly  understand 
the  principles  of  inductive  reasoning,  unless  he  will  take 
the  trouble  to  master  the  meaning  of  this  rule,  by  which 
we  recede  from  an  event  to  the  probability  of  each  of  its 
possible  causes. 

This  rule  or  principle  of  the  indirect  method  is  that 
which  common  sense  leads  us  to  adopt  almost  instinctively, 
before  we  have  any  comprehension  of  the  principle  in  its 
general  form.  It  is  easy  to  see,  too,  that  it  is  the  rule 
which  will,  out  of  a  great  multitude  of  cases,  lead  us  most 
often  to  the  truth,  since  the  most  probable  cause  of  an 
event  really  means  that  cause  which  in  the  greatest 
number  of  cases  produces  the  event.  But  I  have  only 
met  with  one  attempt  at  a  general  demonstration  of  the 
principle.  Poisson  imagines  each  possible  cause  of  an 
event  to  be  represented  by  a  distinct  ballot-box,  containing 
black  and  white  balls,  in  such  ratio  that  the  probability  of 
a  white  ball  being  drawn  is  equal  to  that  of  the  event 


THE  INDUCTIVE  OR  INVERSE  METHOD.  281 

happening.  He  further  supposes  that  each  box,  as  is 
possible,  contains  the  same  total  number  of  balls,  black 
and  white  ;  and  then,  mixing  all  the  contents  of  the  boxes 
together,  he  shows  that  if  a  white  ball  be  drawn  from  the 
aggregate  ballot-box  thus  formed,  the  probability  that  it 
proceeded  from  any  particular  ballot-box  is  represented 
by  the  number  of  white  balls  in  that  particular  box, 
divided  by  that  total  number  of  white  balls  in  all  the 
boxes.  This  result  corresponds  to  that  given  by  the 
principle  in  question c. 

Thus,  if  there  be  three  boxes,  each  containing  ten  balls 
in  all,  and  respectively  containing  seven,  four,  and  three 
wThite  balls,  then  on  mixing  all  the  balls  together  we  have 
fourteen  Avhite  ones  ;  and  if  we  draw  a  white  ball,  that  is 
if  the  event  happens,  the  probability  that  it  came  out  of 

the  first  box  is  T7T ;  which  is  exactly  equal  to  — ^ — ^-,the 

Tff  +  T&  +  T(> 

fraction  given  by  the  rule  of  the  Inverse  Method. 

Simple  Applications  of  the  Inverse  Method. 

In  many  cases  of  scientific  induction  wTe  may  apply  the 
principle  of  the  inverse  method  in  a  simple  manner.  If 
only  two,  or  at  the  most  a  few  hypotheses,  may  be  made 
as  to  the  origin  of  certain  phenomena,  or  the  connection  of 
one  phenomenon  with  another,  we  may  sometimes  easily 
calculate  the  respective  probabilities  of  these  hypotheses. 
It  was  thus  that  Professors  Bunsen  and  Kirchhoff  esta 
blished,  with  a  probability  little  short  of  certainty,  that 
iron  exists  in  the  sun.  On  comparing  the  spectra  of  sun 
light  and  of  the  light  proceeding  from  the  incandescent 
vapour  of  iron,  it  became  apparent  that  at  least  sixty 
bright  lines  in  the  spectrum  of  iron  coincided  with  dark 

c  Poisson,  '  Rechcrclies  sur  la  Probability  cles  Jugcmcnts,'  Paris,  1837, 
pp.  82,  83. 


282  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

lines  in  the  sun's  spectrum.  Such  coincidences  could 
never  be  observed  with  certainty,  because,  even  if  the  lines 
only  closely  approached,  the  instrumental  imperfections  of 
the  spectroscope  would  make  them  apparently  coincident, 
and  if  one  line  came  within  half  a  millemetre  of  another, 
on  the  map  of  the  spectra,  they  could  not  be  pronounced 
distinct.  Now  the  average  distance  of  the  solar  lines  on 
KirchhofFs  map  is  2  millemetres,  and  if  we  throw  down 
a  line,  as  it  were,  by  pure  chance  on  such  a  map,  the  pro 
bability  is  about  one-half  that  the  new  line  will  fall  within 
^  millemetre  on  one  side  or  the  other  of  some  one  of  the 
solar  lines.  To  put  it  in  another  way,  we  may  suppose 
that  each  solar  line,  either  on  account  of  its  real  breadth 
or  the  defects  of  the  instrument,  possesses  a  breadth  of 
TJ  millemetre,  and  that  each  line  in  the  iron  spectrum  has 
a  like  breadth.  The  probability  then  is  just  one-half  that 
the  centre  of  each  iron  line  will  come  by  chance  within 
i  millemetre  of  the  centre  of  a  solar  line,  so  as  to  appear 
to  coincide  with  it.  The  probability  of  casual  coincidence 
of  each  iron  line  with  a  solar  line  is  in  like  manner  ^. 
Coincidence  in  the  case  of  each  of  the  sixty  iron  lines  is 
a  very  unlikely  event  if  it  arises  casually,  for  it  would 
have  a  probability  of  only  (^)co  or  less  than  i  in  a  trillion. 
The  odds,  in  short,  are  more  than  a  million  million  millions 
to  unity  against  such  casual  coincidence fl.  But  on  the 
other  hypothesis,  that  iron  exists  in  the  sun,  it  is  highly 
probable  that  such  coincidences  would  be  observed  ;  it  is 
immensely  more  probable  that  sixty  coincidences  would 
be  observed  if  iron  existed  in  the  sun,  than  that  they 
should  arise  from  chance.  Hence  by  our  principle  it  is 
immensely  probable  that  iron  does  exist  in  the  sun. 

All   the   other    interesting  results  given   by  the   com 
parison  of  spectra,  rest  upon  the  same  principle  of  proba- 

d  Kirchhoff's  '  Researches  on  the  Solar  Spectrum.'     First  part,  trans 
lated  by  Professor  Roscoe,  pp.  18,  19. 


THE  INDUCTIVE  OK  INVERSE  METHOD.  283 

bility.  The  almost  complete  coincidence  between  the 
spectra  of  solar,  lunar,  and  planetary  light  renders  it  prac 
tically  certain  that  the  light  is  all  of  solar  origin,  and  is 
reflected  from  the  surfaces  of  the  moon  and  planets, 
suffering  only  slight  alteration  from  the  atmospheres  of 
some  of  the  planets.  A  fresh  confirmation  of  the  truth  of 
the  Copernican  theory  is  thus  furnished. 

A  vast  probability  may  be  shown  to  exist  that  the  heat, 
light,  and  chemical  effects  of  the  sun  are  due  to  the  same 
rays,  and  are  so  many  different  manifestations  of  the  same 
undulations.  For  a  photograph  of  the  spectrum  corre 
sponds  exactly  with  what  the  eye  observes,  allowance  being 
made  for  the  great  differences  of  chemical  activity  in  dif 
ferent  parts  of  the  spectrum  ;  and  delicate  experiments 
with  the  thermopile  also  show  that,  where  there  is  a  dark 
line,  there  also  the  heat  of  the  rays  is  absent. 

Sir  J.  Herschel  proved  the  connexion  between  the  di 
rection  of  the  oblique  faces  of  symmetrical  quartz  crystals, 
and  the  direction  in  which  the  same  crystals  rotate  the 
plane  of  the  polarisation  of  light.  For  if  it  is  found  in  a 
second  crystal  that  the  relation  is  the  same  as  in  the  first, 
the  probability  of  this  happening  by  chance  is  ^  ;  the 
probability  that  in  another  crystal  also  the  direction 
would  be  the  same  is  5,  and  so  on.  The  probability  that 
in  n  +  i  crystals  there  would  be  casual  agreement  of  direc 
tion  is  the  wth  power  of  ^,  Thus,  if  in  examining  fourteen 
crystals  the  same  relation  of  the  two  phenomena  is  dis 
covered  in  each,  the  probability  that  it  proceeds  from 
uniform  conditions  is  more  than  8000  to  i  e.  Now,  since 
the  first  observations  on  this  subject  were  made  in  1820, 
no  exceptions  have  been  observed,  so  that  the  probability 
of  invariable  connexion  is  incalculably  great. 

e  'Edinburgh  Review,'  No.  185,  vol.  xcii.  July  1850,  p.  32  ;  Herschel's 
'Essays,'  p.  421;  'Transactions  of  the  Cambridge  Philosophical  Society,' 
vol.  i.  p.  43. 


284  THE   PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

A  good  instance  of  this  method  is  furnished  by  the 
agreement  of  numerical  statements  with  the  truth.  Thus, 

o  ' 

iii  a  manuscript  of  Diodorus  Siculus,  as  Dr.  Young  states  g, 
the  ceremony  of  an  ancient  Egyptian  funeral  is  described 
as  requiring  the  presence  of  forty-two  persons  sitting  in 
judgment  on  the  merits  of  the  deceased,  and  in  many 
ancient  papyrus  rolls  the  same  number  of  persons  are 
found  delineated.  The  probability  is  but  slight  that  Dio 
dorus,  if  inventing  his  statements  or  writing  without 
proper  information,  would  have  chosen  such  a  number  as 
forty-two,  and  though  there  are  not  the  data  for  an  exact 
calculation,  Dr.  Young  considers  that  the  probability  in 
favour  of  the  correctness  of  the  manuscript  and  the 
veracity  of  the  writer  on  this  ground  alone,  is  at  least 
100  to  i. 

It  is  exceedingly  probable  that  the  ancient  Egyptians 
had  exactly  recorded  the  eclipses  occurring  during  long 
periods  of  time,  for  Diogenes  Laertius  mentions  that  373 
solar  and  832  lunar  eclipses  had  been  observed,  and  the 
ratio  between  these  numbers  exactly  expresses  that  which 
would  hold  true  of  the  eclipses  of  any  long  period,  of 
say  1 200  or  1.300  years,  as  estimated  on  astronomical 
grounds  h. 

It  is  evident  that  an  agreement  between  small  numbers, 
or  customary  numbers,  such  as  seven,  one  hundred,  a 
myriad,  &c.,  is  much  more  likely  to  happen  from  chance, 
and  therefore  gives  much  less  presumption  of  dependence. 
If  two  ancient  writers  spoke  of  the  sacrifice  of  oxen,  they 
would  in  all  probability  describe  it  as  a  hecatomb,  and 
there  would  be  nothing  remarkable  in  the  coincidence. 

On  similar  grounds,  we  must  inevitably  believe  in  the 
human  origin  of  the  flint  flakes  so  copiously  discovered  of 
late  years.  For  though  the  accidental  stroke  of  one  stone 

g  Young's  'Works,'  vol.  ii.  pp.  18,  19. 

11  'History  of  Astronomy,'  Library  of  Useful  Knowledge,  p.  14. 


THE  INDUCTIVE  OR  INVERSE  METHOD.  285 

against  another  may  often  produce  flakes,  such  as  are 
occasionally  found  on  the  sea-shore,  yet  when  several 
flakes  are  found  in  close  company,  and  each  one  bears 
evidence,  not  of  a  single  blow  only,  but  of  several  suc 
cessive  blows,  all  conducing  to  form  a  symmetrical  knife- 
like  form,  the  probability  of  a  natural  and  accidental 
origin  becomes  incredibly  small,  and  the  contrary  suppo 
sition,  that  they  are  the  work  of  intelligent  beings, 
approximately  certain '. 

An  interesting  calculation  concerning  the  probable  con 
nexion  of  languages,  in  which  several  or  many  words  are 
similar  in  sound  and  meaning,  was  made  by  Dr.  Young  k. 

Application  of  the  TJieory  of  Probabilities  in 
Astronomy. 

The  science  of  astronomy,  occupied  with  the  simple 
relations  of  distance,  magnitude,  and  motion  of  the 
heavenly  bodies,  admits  more  easily  than  almost  any 
other  science  of  interesting  conclusions  founded  on  the 
theory  of  probability.  More  than  a  century  ago,  in 
1 767,  Michell  showed  the  extreme  probability  of  bonds 
connecting  together  systems  of  stars.  He  was  struck 
by  the  unexpected  number  of  fixed  stars  which  have 
companions  close  to  them.  Such  a  conjunction  might 
happen  casually  by  one  star,  although  possibly  at  a 
great  distance  from  the  other,  happening  to  lie  on  the 
same  straight  line  passing  near  the  earth.  But  the 
probabilities  are  so  greatly  against  such  an  optical  union 
happening  often  in  the  expanse  of  the  heavens,  that 
Michell  asserted  the  existence  of  a  bond  between  most  of 

1  Evans'  'Ancient  Stone  Implements  of  Great  Britain.'  London, 
1872  (Longmans). 

k  'Philosophical  Transactions,'  1819;  Young's  'Works,'  vol.  ii.  pp. 
15-18. 


286  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

the  double  stars.  It  has  since  been  estimated  by  Struve, 
that  the  odds  are  95  70  to  I  against  any  two  stars  of  not 
less  than  the  seventh  magnitude  falling  within  the  appa 
rent  distance  of  four  seconds  of  each  other  by  chance,  and 
yet  ninety-one  such  cases  were  known  when  the  estimation 
was  made,  and  many  more  cases  have  since  been  discovered. 
There  were  also  four  known  triple  stars,  and  yet  the  odds 
against  the  appearance  of  any  one  such  conjunction  are 
173,524  to  i l.  The  conclusions  of  Michell  have  been  en 
tirely  verified  by  the  discovery  that  many  double  stars  are 
in  connexion  under  the  law  of  gravitation. 

Michell  also  investigated  the  probability  that  the  six 
brightest  stars  in  the  Pleiades  should  have  come 
by  accident  into  such  striking  proximity.  Estimating 
the  number  of  stars  of  equal  or  greater  brightness  at 
1500,  he  found  the  odds  to  be  nearly  500,000  to  i 
against  casual  conjunction.  Extending  the  same  kind  of 
argument  to  other  clusters,  such  as  that  of  Prsesepe,  the 
nebula  in  the  hilt  of  Perseus'  sword,  he  saysm  :  '  We 
may  with  the  highest  probability  conclude,  the  odds 
against  the  contrary  opinion  being  many  million  millions 
to  one,  that  the  stars  are  really  collected  together  in 
clusters  in  some  places,  where  they  form  a  kind  of  system, 
while  in  others  there  are  either  few  or  none  of  them,  to 
whatever  cause  this  may  be  owing,  whether  to  their 
mutual  gravitation,  or  to  some  other  law  or  appointment 
of  the  Creator.' 

The  calculations  of  Michell  have  been  called  in  question 
by  the  late  James  D.  Forbes  n,  and  Mr.  Todhunter  vaguely 

I  Herschel,  'Outlines  of  Astronomy,'   1849,  p.   565;  but  Todhunter, 
in  his  'History  of  the  Theory   of  Probability,'   p.  335,  states  that  the 
calculations  do  not  agree  with  those  published  by  Struve. 

111  'Philosophical  Transactions,'  1767,  vol.  Ivii.  p.  431. 

II  'Philosophical  Magazine,'  3rd  Series,  vol.  xxxvii.  p.  401,  December, 
1850;  also  August,  1849. 


THE  INDUCTIVE  OR  INVERSE  METHOD.  287 

countenances  his  objections  °,  otherwise  I  should  not  have 
thought  them  of  much  weight.  Certainly  Laplace  accepts 
Michell's  views  P,  and  if  Michell  be  in  error,  it  is  in  the 
methods  of  calculation,  not  in  the  general  validity  of  his 
conclusions. 

Similar  calculations  might  no  doubt  be  applied  to  the 
peculiar  drifting  motions  which  have  been  detected  by 
Mr.  .R.  A.  Proctor  in  some  of  the  constellations  (i.  Against 
a  general  tendency  of  stars  to  move  in  .one  direction  by 
chance,  the  odds  are  very  great.  It  is  on  a  similar  ground 
that  a  considerable  proper  motion  of  the  sun  is  found  to 
exist  with  immense  probability,  because  on  the  average 
the  fixed  stars  show  a  tendency  to  move  apparently  from 
one  point  of  the  heavens  towards  that  diametrically  op 
posite.  The  sun's  motion  in  the  contrary  direction  would 
explain  this  tendency,  otherwise  we  must  believe  that 
myriads  of  stars  accidentally  agree  in  their  direction  of 
motion,  or  are  urged  by  some  common  force  from  which  the 
sun  is  exempt.  It  may  be  said  that  the  rotation  of  the 
earth  is  proved  in  like  manner,  because  it  is  immensely 
more  probable  that  one  body  would  revolve  than  that 
the  sun,  moon,  planets,  comets,  and  the  whole  of  the  stars 
of  the  heavens  should  be  whirled  round  the  earth  daily, 
with  a  uniform  motion  superadded  to  their  own  peculiar 
motions.  This  appears  to  be  nearly  the  reason  which  led 
Gilbert,  one  of  the  earliest  English  Copernicans,  and  in 
every  way  an  admirable  physicist,  to  admit  the  rotation 
of  the  earth,  while  Francis  Bacon  denied  it r. 

In  contemplating  the  planetary  system,  we  are  struck 
with  the  similarity  in  direction  of  nearly  all  its  move- 

0  '  History,'  &c.,  p.  334. 
P  '  Essai  Philosophique/  p.  57. 

(i  '  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society,'  20  January,  1870.  '  Philosophical 
Magazine,'  4th  Series,  vol.  xxxix.  p.  381. 

r  Hallam's  '  Literature  of  Europe,'  ist  ed.  vol.  ii.  p.  464. 


288  THE   PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

ments.  Newton  remarked  upon  the  regularity  arid  uni 
formity  of  these  motions,  and  contrasted  them  with  the 
eccentricity  and  irregularity  of  the  cometary  orbits  s- 
Could  we,  in  fact,  look  down  upon  the  system  from  the 
northern  side,  we  should  see  all  the  planets  moving  round 
from  west  to  east,  the  satellites  moving  round  their 
primaries  and  the  sun,  planets,  and  all  the  satellites 
rotating  in  the  same  direction,  with  some  exceptions  on 
the  verge  of  the  system.  Now  in  the  time  of  Laplace 
eleven  planets  were  known,  and  the  directions  of  rotation 
were  known  for  the  sun,  six  planets,  the  satellites  of  Jupiter, 
Saturn's  ring,  and  one  of  his  satellites.  Thus  there  were 
altogether  43  motions  all  concurring,  namely  :— 

Orbital  motions  of  eleven  planets  .  .11 
Orbital  motions  of  eighteen  satellites  .  .18 
Axial  rotations  .  .  .  .  .  14 

43 

The  probability  that  43  motions  independent  of  each 
other  would  coincide  by  chance  is  the  4 2nd  power  of  ^,  so 
that  the  odds  are  about  4,400,000,000,000  to  i  in  favour 
of  some  common  cause  for  the  uniformity  of  direction.  This 
probability,  as  Laplace  observes*,  is  higher  than  that  of 
many  historical  events  which  we  undoubtingly  believe. 
In  the  present  day,  the  probability  is  much  increased  by 
the  discovery  of  additional  planets,  and  the  rotation  of 
other  satellites,  and  it  is  only  slightly  weakened  by  the 
fact  that  some  of  the  outlying  satellites  are  exceptional  in 
direction,  there  being  considerable  evidence  of  an  acci 
dental  disturbance  in  the  more  distant  parts  of  the 
system. 

Hardly  less  remarkable  than  the  uniformity  of  motion 

s  '  Principia,'  bk.  ii.     General  scholium. 

'  Essai  Philosophique,'  p.  55.    Laplace  appears  to  count  the  rings  of 
Saturn  as  giving  two  independent  movements. 


THE  INDUCTIVE  OB  INVERSE  METHOD.  289 

is  the  near  approximation  of  all  the  orbits  of  the  planets 
to  a  common  plane.  Daniel  Bernouilli  roughly  estimated 
the  probability  of  such  an  agreement  arising  from  accident 
at  r^c,  the  greatest  inclination  of  any  orbit  to  the  sun's 

(12)  '  J 

equator  being  i-i2th  part  of  a  quadrant.  Laplace  de 
voted  to  this  subject  some  of  his  most  ingenious  investi 
gations.  He  found  the  .probability  that  the  sum  of  the 
inclinations  of  the  planetary  orbits  would  not  exceed  by 
accident  the  actual  amount  ("914187  of  a  right  angle  for 
the  ten  planets  known  in  1801)  to  be  j$  ('Qi/j-iS/)10,  or 
about '00000011235.  This  probability  may  be  combined 
with  that  derived  from  the  direction  of  motion,  and  it 
then  becomes  immensely  probable  that  the  constitution  of 
the  planetary  system  arose  out  of  uniform  conditions,  or, 
as  we  say,  from  some  common  cause11. 

If  the  same  kind  of  calculation  be  applied  to  the  orbits 
of  comets  the  result  is  very  different  y.  Of  the  orbits 
which  have  been  determined  48*9  per  cent,  only  are  direct 
or  in  the  same  direction  as  the  planetary  motions  z.  Hence 
it  becomes  apparent  that  comets  do  not  properly  belong 
to  the  solar  system,  and  it  is  probable  that  they  are  stray 
portions  of  nebulous  matter  which  have  become  accidently 
attached  to  the  system  by  the  attractive  powers  of  the 
sun  or  Jupiter. 

Statement  of  the  General  Inverse  Problem. 

In  the  instances  described  in  the  preceding  sections, 
we  have  been  occupied  in  receding  from  the  occurrence 

«  Lubbock,  'Essay  on  Probability/  p.  14.  De  Morgan,  '  Encyc. 
Metrop.'  art.  Probability,  p.  412.  Todhunter's  '  History  of  the  Theory  of 
Probability,'  p.  543.  Concerning  the  objections  raised  to  these  conclu 
sions  by  the  late  Dr.  Boole,  see  the  '  Philosophical  Magazine,'  4th  Series, 
vol.  ii.  p.  98.  Boole's  '  Laws  of  Thought,'  pp.  364-375. 

y  Laplace,  'Essai  Philosophique,'  pp.  55,  56. 

z  Chambers's  '  Astronomy,'  2nd  ed.  pp.  346-49. 

U 


290  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

of  certain  similar  events  to  the  probability  that  there 
must  have  been  a  condition  or  cause  for  such  events.  We 
have  found  that  the  theory  of  probability,  although  never 
yielding  a  certain  result,  often  enables  us  to  establish  an 
hypothesis  beyond  the  reach  of  reasonable  doubt.  There 
is,  however,  another  method  of  applying  the  theory, 
which  possesses  for  us  even  greater  interest,  because  it 
illustrates,  in  the  most  complete  manner,  the  theory  of 
inference  adopted  in  this  work,  which  theory  indeed  it 
suggested.  The  problem  to  be  solved  is  as  follows  : — 

An  event  having  happened  a  certain  number  of  times, 
and  failed  a  certain  number  of  times,  required  the  pro 
bability  that  it  will  happen  any  given  number  of  times 
in  the  future  under  the  same  circumstances. 

All  the  larger  planets  hitherto  discovered  move  in  one 
direction  round  the  sun  ;  what  is  the  probability  that,  if  a 
new  planet  exterior  to  Neptune  be  discovered,  it  will  move 
in  the  same  direction  ?  All  known  permanent  gases,  ex 
cept  chlorine,  are  colourless ;  what  is  the  probability  that, 
if  some  new  permanent  gas  should  be  discovered,  it  will 
be  colourless  1  In  the  general  solution  of  this  problem,  we 
wish  to  infer  the  future  happening  of  any  event  from  the 
number  of  times  that  it  has  already  been  observed  to 
happen.  Now,  it  is  very  instructive  to  find  that  there  is 
no  known  process  by  which  we  can  pass  directly  from  the 
data  to  the  conclusion.  It  is  always  requisite  to  recede 
from  the  data  to  the  probability  of  some  hypothesis,  and 
to  make  that  hypothesis  the  ground  of  our  inference 
concerning  future  happenings.  Mathematicians,  in  fact, 
make  every  hypothesis  which  is  applicable  to  the  question 
in  hand ;  they  then  calculate,  by  the  inverse  method,  the 
probability  of  every  such  hypothesis  according  to  the 
data,  and  the  probability  that  if  each  hypothesis  be  true, 
the  required  future  event  will  happen.  The  total  pro 
bability  that  the  event  will  happen,  is  the  sum  of  the 


THE  INDUCTIVE  OR  INVERSE  METHOD.  291 

separate  probabilities  contributed  by  each  distinct  hypo 
thesis. 

To  illustrate  more  precisely  the  method  of  solving  the 
problem,  it  is  desirable  to  adopt  some  concrete  mode  of 
representation,  and  the  ballot-box,  so  often  employed  by 
mathematicians,  will  best  serve  our  purpose.  Let  the 
happening  of  any  event  be  represented  by  the  drawing  of 
a  white  ball  from  a  ballot-box,  while  the  failure  of  an 
event  is  represented  by  the  drawing  of  a  black  ball.  Now, 
in  the  inductive  problem  we  are  supposed  to  be  ignorant 
of  the  contents  of  the  ballot-box,  and  are  required  to 
ground  all  our  inferences  on  our  experience  of  those  con 
tents  as  shown  in  successive  drawings.  Rude  common 
sense  would  guide  us  nearly  to  a  true  conclusion.  Thus 
if  we  had  drawn  twenty  balls,  one  after  another,  replacing 
the  ball  after  each  drawing,  and  the  ball  had  in  each  case 
proved  to  be  white,  we  should  believe  that  there  was  a 
considerable  preponderance  of  white  balls  in  the  urn,  and 
a  probability  in  favour  of  drawing  a  white  ball  on  the 
next  occasion.  Though  we  had  drawn  white  balls  for 
thousands  of  times  without  fail,  it  would  still  be  possible 
that  some  black  balls  lurked  in  the  urn  and  would  at  last 
appear,  so  that  our  inferences  could  never  be  certain.  On 
the  other  hand,  if  black  balls  came  at  intervals,  I  should 
expect  that  after  a  certain  number  of  trials  the  future 
results  would  agree  more  or  less  closelv  with  the  past 

o  «•' 

ones. 

The  mathematical  solution  of  the  question  consists  in 
nothing  more  than  a  close  analysis  of  the  mode  in  which 
our  common  sense  proceeds.  If  twenty  white  balls  have 
been  drawn  and  no  black  ball,  my  common  sense  tells  me 
that  any  hypothesis  which  makes  the  black  balls  in  the 
urn  considerable  compared  -with  the  white  ones  is  im 
probable  ;  a  preponderance  of  white  balls  is  a  more  pro 
bable  hypothesis,  and  as  a  deduction  from  this  more 

u  2 


292  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

probable  hypothesis,  I  expect  a  recurrence  of  white  balls. 
The  mathematician  merely  reduces  this  process  of  thought 
to  exact  numbers.  Taking,  for  instance,  the  hypothesis 
that  there  are  99  white  and  one  black  ball  in  the  urn, 
he  can  calculate  the  probability  that  20  white  balls 
should  be  drawn  in  succession  in  those  circumstances ;  he 
thus  forms  a  definite  estimate  of  the  probability  of  this 
hypothesis,  and  knowing  at  the  same  time  the  probability 
of  a  white  ball  reappearing  if  such  be  the  contents  of  the 
urn,  he  combines  these  probabilities,  and  obtains  an  exact 
estimate  that  a  white  ball  will  recur  in  consequence  of 
this  hypothesis.  But  as  this  hypothesis  is  only  one  out 
of  many  possible  ones,  since  the  ratio  of  white  and  black 
balls  may  be  98  to  2,  or  97  to  3,  or  96  to  4,  and  so  on, 
he  has  to  repeat  the  estimate  for  every  such  possible 
hypothesis.  To  make  the  method  of  solving  the  problem 
perfectly  evident,  I  will  describe  in  the  next  section  a 
very  simple  case  of  the  problem,  originally  devised  for  the 
purpose  by  Condorcet,  which  was  also  adopted  by  Lacroixa, 
and  has  passed  into  the  works  of  De  Morgan,  Lubbock, 
and  others. 

Simple  Illustration  of  the  Inverse  Problem. 

Suppose  it  to  be  known  that  a  ballot-box  contains  only 
four  black  or  white  balls,  the  ratio  of  black  and  white  balls 
being  unknown.  Four  drawings  having  been  made  with 
replacement,  and  a  white  ball  having  appeared  on  each 
occasion  but  one,  it  is  required  to  determine  the  proba 
bility  that  a  white  ball  will  appear  next  time.  Now  the 
hypotheses  which  can  be  made  as  to  the  contents  of  the 
urn  are  very  limited  in  number,  and  are  at  most  the 
following  five  :  — 

a  'Traite  dldmentaire  du  Calcul  ties  Probabilites,'  3rd  ed.  (1833), 
p.  148. 


THE  INDUCTIVE  OR  INVERSE  METHOD.  293 


4    white   and   o   black   balls 


The  actual  occurrence  of  black  and  white  balls  in  the 
drawings  renders  the  first  and  last  hypotheses  out  of  the 
question,  so  that  we  have  only  three  left  to  consider. 

If  the  box  contains  three  white  and  one  black,  the 
probability  of  drawing  a  white  each  time  is  f  ,  and  a  black 
3-  ;  so  that  the  compound  event  observed,  namely,  three 
white  and  one  black,  has  the  probability  f  x  f  x  f  x  \,  by 
the  rule  already  given  (p.  233).  But  as  it  is  indifferent 
to  us  in  what  order  the  balls  are  drawn,  and  the  black 
ball  might  come  first,  second,  third,  or  fourth,  we  must 
multiply  by  four,  to  obtain  the  probability  of  three  white 
and  one  black  in  any  order,  thus  getting  ~. 

Taking  the  next  hypothesis  of  two  white  and  two 
black  balls  in  the  urn,  we  obtain  for  the  same  proba 
bility  the  quantity  ^x±x±x±x^,or  Jf,  and  from  the 
third  hypothesis  of  one  white  and  three  black  we  deduce 
likewise  ^  x  ^  x  ^  x  f  x  4,  or  f^.  According,  then,  as  we 
adopt  the  first,  second,  or  third  hypothesis,  the  proba 
bility  that  the  result  actually  noticed  would  follow  is  f-f, 
i|,  and  j,34>  Now  it  is  certain  that  one  or  other  of  these 

O  4  '  O  i 

hypotheses  must  be  the  true  one,  and  their  absolute 
probabilities  are  proportional  to  the  probabilities  that  the 
observed  events  would  follow  from  them  (see  p.  279).  All 
we  have  to  do,  then,  in  order  to  obtain  the  absolute  pro 
bability  of  each  hypothesis,  is  to  alter  these  fractions  in 
a  uniform  ratio,  so  that  their  sum  shall  be  unity,  the 
expression  of  certainty.  Now  since  27  +  16  +  3  =46, 
this  will  be  effected  by  dividing  each  fraction  by  46  and 


294  THE   PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

multiplying  by  64.  Thus  the  probabilities  of  the  first, 
second,  and  third  hypotheses  are  respectively — 

46'       46'       46 

The  inductive  part  of  the  problem  is  now  completed,  since 
we  have  found  that  the  urn  most  likely  contains  three 
white  and  one  black  ball,  and  have  assigned  the  exact 
probability  of  each  possible  supposition.  But  we  are  now 
in  a  position  to  resume  deductive  reasoning,  and  infer  the 
probability  that  the  next  drawing  will  yield,  say  a  white 
ball.  For  if  the  box  contains  three  white  and  one  black 
ball,  the  probability  of  drawing  a  white  one  is  certainly  f ; 
and  as  the  probability  of  the  box  being  so  constituted  is 
f|,  the  compound  probability  that  the  box  will  be  so  filled 
and  will  give  a  white  ball  at  the  next  trial,  is 

27         3          81 
_JL  x  2  or  — _ 

46        4         104 

Again,  the  probability  is  ~  that  the  box  contains  two 
white  and  two  black,  and  under  those  conditions  the 
probability  is  |  that  a  white  ball  will  appear  ;  hence  the 
probability  that  a  white  ball  will  appear  in  consequence 
of  that  condition,  is 

16          i  32 

~r    x         or        -1  ^ 

46  2  184 

From  the  third  supposition  we  get  in  like  manner  the 

probability 

i 

jL  x   _    or  -^  . 
46         4  184 

Now  since  one  and  not  more  than  one  hypothesis  can  be 
true,  we  may  add  together  these  separate  probabilities, 
and  we  find  that 

81   i   32      3     116 
184  '  '  184  '   784    184 

is  the  complete  probability  that  a  white  ball  will  be  next 
drawn  under  the  conditions  and  data  supposed. 


TUB  INDUCTIVE  OR  INVERSE  METHOD.  295 

General  Solution  of  the  Inverse  Problem. 

In  the  instance  of  the  inverse  method  described  in  the 
last  section,  a  very  few  balls  were  supposed  to  be  in  the 
ballot-box  for  the  purpose  of  simplifying  the  calculation. 
In  order  that  our  solution  may  apply  to  natural  phe 
nomena,  we  must  render  our  hypothesis  as  little  arbitrary 
as  possible.  Having  no  a  priori  knowledge  of  the  con 
ditions  of  the  phenomena  in  question,  there  is  no  limit 
to  the  variety  of  hypotheses  which  might  be  suggested. 
Mathematicians  have  therefore  had  recourse  to  the  most 
extensive  suppositions  which  can  be  made,  namely,  that 
the  ballot-box  contains  an  infinite  number  of  balls ;  they 
have  thus  varied  the  proportion  of  white  balls  to  black 
balls  continuously,  from  the  smallest  to  the  greatest 
possible  proportion,  and  estimated  the  aggregate  proba 
bility  which  results  from  this  comprehensive  supposition. 

To  explain  their  procedure,  let  us  imagine  that,  instead 
of  an  infinite  number,  the  ballot-box  contained  a  large 
finite  number  of  balls,  say  1000.  Then  the  number  of 
white  balls  might  be  i  or  2  or  3  or  4,  and  so  on,  up 
to  999.  Supposing  that  three  white  and  one  black  ball 
have  been  drawn  from  the  urn  as  before,  there  is  a  certain 
very  small  probability  that  this  would  have  occurred  in 
the  case  of  a  box  containing  one  white  and  999  black 
balls ;  there  is  also  a  small  probability  that  from  such  a 
box  the  next  ball  would  be  white.  Compound  these 
probabilities,  and  we  have  the  probability  that  the  next 
ball  really  will  be  white,  in  consequence  of  the  ex 
istence  of  that  proportion  of  balls.  If  there  be  two 
white  and  998  black  balls  m  the  box,  the  probability 
is  greater,  and  will  increase  until  the  balls  are  supposed 
to  be  in  the  proportion  of  those  drawn.  Now  999  different 
hypotheses  are  possible,  and  the  calculation  is  to  be  made 
for  each  of  these,  arid  their  aggregate  taken  as  the  final 


296  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

result.  It  is  apparent  that  as  the  number  of  balls  in  the 
box  is  increased,  the  absolute  probability  of  any  one  hypo 
thesis  concerning  the  exact  proportion  of  balls  is  decreased, 
but  the  aggregate  results  of  all  the  hypotheses  will  assume 
the  character  of  a  wide  average. 

When  we  take  the  step  of  supposing  the  balls  within 
the  urn  to  be  infinite  in  number,  the  possible  proportions 
of  white  and  black  balls  also  become  infinite,  and  the 
probability  of  any  one  proportion  actually  existing  is 
infinitely  small.  Hence  the  final  result  that  the  next  ball 
drawn  will  be  white  is  really  the  sum  of  an  infinite 
number  of  infinitely  small  quantities.  It  might  seem, 
indeed,  utterly  impossible  to  calculate  out  a  problem 
having  an  infinite  number  of  hypotheses,  but  the  wonderful 
resources  of  the  integral  calculus  enable  this  to  be  done 
with  far  greater  facility  than  if  we  supposed  any  large 
finite  number  of  balls,  and  then  actually  computed  the 
results.  I  will  not  attempt  to  describe  the  processes  by 
which  Laplace  finally  accomplished  the  complete  solution 
of  the  problem.  They  are  to  be  found  described  in  several 
English  works,  especially  De  Morgan's  *  Treatise  on  Proba 
bilities/  in  the  '  Encyclopaedia  Metropolitana,'  and  Mr.  Tod- 
hunter's  '  History  of  the  Theory  of  Probability.'  The  ab 
breviating  power  of  mathematical  analysis  \vas  never  more 
strikingly  shown.  But  I  may  add  that  though  the  integral 
calculus  is  employed  as  a  means  of  summing  infinitely 
numerous  results,  we  in  no  way  abandon  the  principles  of 
combinations  already  treated.  We  calculate  the  values  of 
infinitely  numerous  factorials,  not,  however,  obtaining  their 
actual  products,  which  would  lead  to  an  infinite  number  of 
figures,  but  obtaining  the  final  answer  to  the  problem  by 
devices  which  can  only  be  comprehended  after  study  of  the 
integral  calculus. 

It  must  be  allowed  that  the  hypothesis   adopted   by 
Laplace  is  in  some  degree  arbitrary,  so  that  there  was  some 


THE  INDUCTIVE  OR  INVERSE  METHOD.  297 

opening  for  the  doubt  which  Boole  has  cast  upon  it1'. 
But  it  may  be  replied,  (i)  that  the  supposition  of  an  infinite 
number  of  balls  treated  in  the  manner  of  Laplace  is  less 
arbitrary  and  more  comprehensive  than  any  other  that 
could  be  suggested.  (2)  The  result  does  not  differ  much 
from  that  which  would  be  obtained  on  the  hypothesis  of 
any  very  large  finite  number  of  balls.  (3)  The  supposition 
leads  to  a  series  of  simple  formulae  which  can  be  applied 
with  ease  in  many  cases,  and  which  bear  all  the  appearance 
of  truth  so  far  as  it  can  be  independently  judged  by  a 
sound  and  practiced  understanding. 

Rules  of  the  Inverse  Method. 

By  the  solution  of  the  problem,  as  described  in  the  last 
section,  we  obtain  the  following  series  of  simple  rules. 

i.  To  find  the  probability  that  an  event  which  has  not 
hitherto  been  observed  to  fail  ivill  happen  once  more, 
divide  the  number  of  times  the  event  has  been  observed 
increased  by  one,  by  the  same  number  increased  by  two. 

If  there  have  been  m  occasions  on  which  a  certain  event 
might  have  been  observed  to  happen,  and  it  has  happened 
on  all  those  occasions,  then  the  probability  that  it  will 


happen  on  the  next  occasion  of  the  same  kind  is  wl— 

m+2 

For  instance,  we  may  say  that  there  are  nine  places  in 
the  planetary  system  where  planets  might  exist  obeying 
Bode's  law  of  distance,  and  in  every  place  there  is  a 
planet  obeying  the  law  more  or  less  exactly,  although 
no  reason  is  known  for  the  coincidence.  Hence  the  pro 
bability  that  the  next  planet  beyond  Neptune  will 
conform  to  the  law  is  fj. 

2.  To  find  the  probability  that  an  event  which  has  not 
hitherto  failed  will  not  fail  for  a  certain  number  of  new 
occasions,  divide  the  number  of  times  the  event  has  hap- 

b  'Laws  of  Thought/  pp.  368-375. 


298  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

pened  increased  by  one,  by  the  same  number  increased  by 
one  and  the  number  of  times  it  is  to  happen. 

An  event  having  happened  m  times  without  fail,  the 

probability  that  it  will  happen  n  more  times  is 


Thus  the  probability  that  three  new  planets  would  obey 
Bode's  law  is  ff,  but  it  must  be  allowed  that  this,  as  well 
as  the  previous  result,  would  be  much  weakened  by  the 
fact  that  Neptune  can  barely  be  said  to  obey  the  law. 

3.  An  event  having  happened  and  failed  a  certain 
number  of  times,  to  find  the  probability  that  it  will  happen 
the  next  time,  divide  the  number  of  times  the  event  has 
happened  increased  by  one,  by  the  whole  number  of  times 
the  event  has  happened  or  failed  increased  by  two. 

Thus,  if  an  event  has  happened  m  times  and  failed  n  times, 
the  probability  that  it  will  happen  on  the  next  occasion 

TO+  I 

8  m  -\-n-\-  2* 

Thus,  if  we  assume  that  of  the  elements  yet  discovered 
50  are  metallic  and  14  non-metallic,  then  the  proba 
bility  that  the  next  element  discovered  will  be  metallic 

°   (To"' 

Again  since  of  37  metals  which  have  been  sufficiently 
examined  only  four,  namely,  sodium,  potassium,  lan 
thanum  and  lithium,  are  of  less  density  than  water,  the 
probability  that  the  next  metal  examined  or  discovered 

will  be  less  dense  than  water  is  ^—  -  or  ~ 

37  +  2         39. 

We  may  state  the  results  of  the  method  in  a  more 
general  manner  thus, — If  under  given  circumstances  cer 
tain  events  A,  B,  0,  &c.,  have  happened  respectively  m,  n, 
p,  &c.,  times,  and  one  or  other  of  these  events  must 
happen,  then  the  probabilities  of  these  events  are  propor 
tional  to  m  +  i,  ?i -f  i,  p+  i,  &c.  so  that  the  probability 

of  A  will  be  -  But  if  new  events 

TOrf 


THE  INDUCTIVE  OR  INVERSE  METHOD.  299 


may  happen  in  addition  to  those  which  have  been  ob 
served,  we  must  assign  unity  for  the  probability  of  such 
new  event.  The  proportional  probabilities  then  become 
i  for  a  new  event,  m  +  i  for  A,  n  +  i  for  B,  and  so  on,  and 

the  absolute  probability  of  A  is 


+»+J+  &c. 

It  is  very  interesting  to  trace  out  the  variations  of 
probability  according  to  these  rules  under  diverse  circum 
stances.  Thus  the  first  time  a  casual  event  happens  it  is 
i  to  i,  or  as  likely  as  not  that  it  will  happen  again  ;  if  it 
does  happen  it  is  2  to  i  that  it  will  happen  a  third  time  ; 
and  on  successive  occasions  of  the  like  kind  the  odds 
become  3,  4,  5,  6,  &c.,  to  i.  The  odds  of  course  will  be 
discriminated  from  the  probabilities  which  are  successively 
i|,  ^,  ^,  &c.  Thus  on  the  first  occasion  on  which  a  person 
sees  a  shark,  and  notices  that  it  is  accompanied  by  a  little 
pilot  fish,  the  odds  are  i  to  i  ,  or  the  probability  ^,  that  the 
next  shark  will  be  so  accompanied. 

When  an  event  has  happened  a  very  great  number  of 
times,  its  happening  once  again  approaches  nearly  to  cer 
tainty.  Thus  if  we  suppose  the  sun  to  have  risen  demon 
stratively  one  thousand  million  times,  the  probability  that  it 
will  rise  again,  on  the  ground  of  this  knowledge  merely,  is 


1,000,000,000+1    ^     But  then  the        bability  that  it 
1,000,000,000+  i  +  1 
continue  to  rise  for  as  long  a  period  as  we  know  it  to  have 

1         I,OOO,OOO,OOO+I  i  ,1          i  rni 

risen   is   only  —  .  or  almost  exactly  A.     I  he 

y    2,000,000,000+1 

probability  that  it  will  continue  so  rising  a  thousand  times 
as  long  is  only  about  5-^3-.  The  lesson  which  we  may 
draw  from  these  figures  is  quite  that  which  we  should 
adopt  on  other  grounds,  namely  that  experience  never 
affords  certain  knowledge,  and  that  it  is  exceedingly  im 
probable  that  events  will  always  happen  as  we  observe 

c  De  Morgan's  '  Essay  on  Probabilities,'  Cabinet  Cyclopaedia,  p.  67. 


.300  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

them.  Inferences  pushed  far  beyond  their  data  soon  lose 
any  considerable  probability.  De  Morgan  has  saidd,  '  No 
finite  experience  whatsoever  can  justify  us  in  saying  that 
the  future  shall  coincide  with  the  past  in  all  time  to  come, 
or  that  there  is  any  probability  for  such  a  conclusion.'  On 
the  other  hand,  we  gain  the  assurance  that  experience 
sufficiently  extended  and  prolonged  will  give  us  the 
knowledge  of  future  events  with  an  unlimited  degree  of 
probability,  provided  indeed  that  those  events  are  not 
subject  to  arbitrary  interference. 

It  must  be  clearly  understood  that  these  probabilities  are 
only  such  as  arise  from  the  mere  happening  of  the  events, 
irrespective  of  any  knowledge  derived  from  other  sources 
concerning  those  events  or  the  general  laws  of  nature. 
All  our  knowledge  of  nature  is  indeed  founded  in  like 
manner  upon  observation,  and  is  therefore  only  probable. 
The  law  of  gravitation  itself  is  only  probably  true.  But 
when  a  number  of  different  facts,  observed  under  the  most 
diverse  circumstances,  are  found  to  be  harmonized  under  a 
supposed  law  of  nature,  the  probability  of  the  law  approxi 
mates  closely  to  certainty.  Each  science  rests  upon  so 
many  observed  facts,  and  derives  so  much  support  from 
analogies  or  direct  connections  with  other  sciences,  that 
there  are  comparatively  few  cases  where  our  judgment  of 
the  probability  of  an  event  depends  entirely  upon  a  few 
antecedent  events,  disconnected  from  the  general  body  of 
physical  science. 

Events  may  often  again  exhibit  a  regularity  of  suc 
cession  or  preponderance  of  character,  which  the  simple 
formula  will  not  take  into  account.  For  instance,  the 
majority  of  the  elements  recently  discovered  are  metals, 
so  that  the  probability  of  the  next  discovery  being  that  of 
a  metal,  is  doubtless  greater  than  we  calculated  (p.  298). 
At  the  more  distant  parts  of  the  planetary  system,  there 

ll  'Treatise  on  Probability,'  Cabinet  Cyclopaedia,  p.  128. 


THE  INDUCTIVE  OR  INVERSE  METHOD.  301 

are  symptoms  of  disturbance  which  would  prevent  our 
placing  much  reliance  on  any  inference  from  the  prevailing 
order  of  the  known  planets  to  those  undiscovered  ones 
which  may  possibly  exist  at  great  distances.  These  and 
all  like  complications  in  no  way  invalidate  the  theoretic 
truth  of  the  formula,  but  render  their  sound  application 
much  more  difficult. 

Erroneous  objections  have  been  raised  to  the  theory  of 
probability,  on  the  ground  that  we  ought  not  to  trust  to 
our  a  priori  conceptions  of  what  is  likely  to  happen,  but 
should  always  endeavour  to  obtain  precise  experimental 
data  to  guide  use.  This  course,  however,  is  perfectly  in 
accordance  with  the  theory,  which  is  our  best  and  only 
guide,  whatever  data  we  possess.  We  ought  to  be  always 
applying  the  inverse  method  of  probabilities  so  as  to  take 
into  account  all  additional  information.  When  we  throw 
up  a  coin  for  the  first  time,  we  are  probably  quite  ignorant 
whether  it  tends  more  to  fall  head  or  tail  upwards,  and 
we  must  therefore  assume  the  probability  of  each  event 
as  TT.  But  if  it  shows  head,  for  instance,  in  the  first  throw, 
we  now  have  very  slight  experimental  evidence  in  favour 
of  a  tendency  to  show  head.  The  chance  of  two  heads  is 
now  slightly  greater  than  £,  which  it  appeared  to  be  at 
firstf,  and  as  we  go  on  throwing  the  coin  time  after  time, 
the  probability  of  head  appearing  next  time  constantly 
varies  in  a  slight  degree  according  to  the  character  of  our 
previous  experience.  As  Laplace  remarks,  we  ought 
always  to  have  regard  to  such  considerations  in  common 
life.  Events  when  closely  scrutinized  will  hardly  ever 
prove  to  be  quite  independent,  and  the  slightest  pre 
ponderance  one  way  or  the  other  is  some  evidence  of 
connexion,  and  in  the  absence  of  better  evidence  should 
be  taken  into  account. 

e  J.  S.  Mill,  '  System  of  Logic,'  5th  Edition,  bk.  iii.  chap,  xviii.  §  3. 
f  Todhuntcr's  'History,'  pp.  472,  598. 


302  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 


The  grand  object  of  seeking  to  estimate  the  probability 
of  future  events  from  past  experience,  seems  to  have  been 
entertained  by  James  Bernoulli!  and  De  Moivre,  at  lea,st 
such  was  the  opinion  of  Condorcet ;  and  Bernouilli  may  be 
said  to  have  solved  one  case  of  the  problem?'.  The  English 
writers  Bayes  and  Price  are,  however,  undoubtedly  the 
first  who  put  forward  any  distinct  rules  on  the  subject11. 
Condorcet  and  several  other  eminent  mathematicians  ad 
vanced  the  mathematical  theory  of  the  subject;  but  it  was 
reserved  to  the  immortal  Laplace  to  bring  to  the  subject 
the  full  power  of  his  genius,  and  carry  the  solution  of  the 
problem  almost  to  perfection.  It  is  instructive  to  observe 
that  a  theory  which  arose  from  the  consideration  of  the 
most  petty  games  of  chance,  the  rules  and  the  very  names 
of  which  are  in  many  cases  forgotten,  gradually  advanced, 
until  it  embraced  the  most  sublime  problems  of  science, 
and  finally  undertook  to  measure  the  value  and  certainty 
of  all  our  inductions. 

Fortuitous  Coincidences. 

We  should  have  studied  the  theory  of  probability  to 
very  little  purpose,  if  we  thought  that  it  would  furnish 
us  with  an  infallible  guide.  The  theory  itself  points  out 
the  possibility,  or  rather  the  approximate  certainty,  that 
we  shall  sometimes  be  deceived  by  extraordinary,  but 
fortuitous  coincidences.  There  is  no  run  of  luck  so  ex 
treme  that  it  may  not  happen,  and  it  may  happen  to  us, 
or  in  our  time,  as  well  as  to  other  persons  or  in  other 
times.  We  may  be  forced  by  all  correct  calculation  to 
refer  such  coincidences  to  some  necessary  cause,  and  yet 
we  may  be  deceived.  AH  that  the  calculus  of  probability 

s  Todlnmter's  'History,'  pp.   378,   79. 

11  ' Philosophical  Transactions'  [1763],  vol.  liii.  p.  370,  and  [1764], 
vol.  liv.  p.  296.  Todhunter,  pp.  294-300. 


THE  INDUCTIVE  OR  INVERSE  METHOD.  303 

pretends  to  give,  is  the  result  in  the  long  run,  as  it  is 
called,  and  this  really  means  in  an  infinity  of  cases. 
During  any  finite  experience,  however  long,  chances  may 
be  against  us.  Nevertheless  the  theory  is  the  best  guide 
we  can  have.  If  we  always  think  and  act  according  to 
its  well  interpreted  indications,  we  shall  have  the  best 
chance  of  escaping  error ;  and  if  all  persons,  throughout 
all  time  to  come,  obey  the  theory  in  like  manner,  they 
will  undoubtedly  thereby  reap  the  greatest  advantage. 

No  rule  can  be  given  for  descriminating  between 
coincidences  which  are  casual  and  those  which  are  the 
effect  of  law  or  common  conditions.  By  a  fortuitous  or 
casual  coincidence,  we  mean  an  agreement  between  events, 
which  nevertheless  arise  from  wholly  independent  and 
different  causes  or  conditions,  and  which  will  not  always 
so  agree.  It  is  a  fortuitous  coincidence,  if  a  penny  thrown 
up  repeatedly  in  various  ways  always  falls  on  the  same 
side ;  but  it  would  not  be  fortuitous  if  there  were  any 
similarity  in  the  motions  of  the  hand,  and  the  height  of 
the  throw,  so  as  to  cause  or  tend  to  cause  a  uniform 
result.  Now  among  the  infinitely  numerous  events,  ob 
jects,  or  relations  in  the  universe,  it  is  quite  likely  that 
we  shall  occasionally  notice  casual  coincidences.  There 
are  seven  intervals  in  the  octave,  and  there  is  nothing  very 
improbable  in  the  colours  of  the  spectrum  happening  to 
be  apparently  divisible  into  the  same  or  similar  series  of 
seven  intervals.  It  is  hardly  yet  decided  whether  this 
apparent  coincidence,  with  which  Newton  was  much 
struck,  is  well  founded  or  not1,  but  the  question  will 
probably  be  decided  in  the  negative. 

It  is  certainly  a  casual  coincidence  which  the  ancients 
noticed  between  the  seven  vowels,  the  seven  strings  of  the 
lyre,  the  seven  Pleiades,  and  the  seven  chiefs  at  Thebesk. 

i  'Nature/  vol.  i.  p.  286. 

k  Aristotle's  '  Metaphysics,'  xiii.  6.  3. 


304  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

The  accidents  connected  with  the  number  seven  have  mis 
led  the  human  intellect  throughout  the  historical  period. 
Pythagoras  imagined  a  connection  between  the  seven 
planets,  and  the  seven  intervals  of  the  monochord.  The 
alchemists  were  never  tired  of  drawing  inferences  from 
the  coincidence  in  numbers  of  the  seven  planets  and  the 
seven  metals,  not  to  speak  of  the  seven  days  of  the 
week. 

A  singular  circumstance  was  pointed  out  concerning 
the  dimensions  of  the  earth,  sun,  and  moon  ;  the  sun's 
diameter  was  almost  exactly  no  times  as  great  as  the 
earth's  diameter,  while  in  almost  exactly  the  same  ratio 
the  mean  distance  of  the  earth  was  greater  than  the  sun's 
diameter,  and  the  mean  distance  of  the  moon  from  the 
earth  was  greater  than  the  moon's  diameter1.  The  agree 
ment  was  so  close  that  it  might  have  proved  more  than 
casual,  but  its  fortuitous  character  is  sufficiently  shown 
by  the  fact,  that  the  coincidence  ceases  to  be  remarkable 
when  we  adopt  the  amended  dimensions  of  the  planetary 
system. 

A  considerable  number  of  the  elements  have  atomic 
weights,  which  are  apparently  exact  multiples  of  that 
of  hydrogen.  If  this  be  not  a  law  to  be  ultimately  ex 
tended  to  all  the  elements,  as  supposed  by  Prout,  it  is  a 
most  remarkable  coincidence.  But,  as  I  have  observed, 
we  have  no  means  of  absolutely  discriminating  accidental 
coincidences  from  those  which  imply  a  deep  producing 
cause.  A  coincidence  must  either  be  very  strong  in 
itself,  or  it  must  be  corroborated  by  some  explanation  or 
connection  with  other  laws  of  nature.  Little  attention 
was  ever  given  to  the  coincidence  concerning  the  dimen 
sions  of  the  sun,  earth,  and  moon,  because  it  was  not  very 
strong  in  itself,  and  had  no  apparent  connexion  with  the 

1  Chambers's  'Astronomy,'  ist.  ed.  p.  23. 


THE  INDUCTIVE  OR  INVERSE  METHOD.  305 

principles  of  physical  astronomy.  Front's  Law  bears  more 
probability  because  it  would  bring  the  constitution  of  the 
elements  themselves  in  close  connexion  with  the  atomic 
theory,  representing  them  as  built  up  out  of  a  simpler 
substance. 

In  historical  and  social  matters,  coincidences  are  fre 
quently  pointed  out  which  are  due  to  chance,  although 
there  is  always  a  strong  popular  tendency  to  regard  them 
as  the  work  of  design,  or  as  having  some  hidden  cause. 
It  has  been  pointed  out  that  if  to  1 794,  the  number  of 
the  year  in  which  Robespierre  fell,  we  add  the  sum  of  its 
digits,  the  result  is  1815,  the  year  in  which  Napoleon 
fell;  the  repetition  of  the  process  gives  1830,  the  year 
in  which  Charles  the  Tenth  abdicated.  Again,  the  French 
Chamber  of  Deputies,  in  1830,  consisted  of  402  members, 
of  whom  221  formed  the  party  called,  'La  queue  de  Robes 
pierre/  while  the  remainder,  181  in  number,  were  named 
'  Les  honnetes  gens.'  If  we  give  to  each  letter  a  numerical 
value  corresponding  to  its  place  in  the  alphabet,  it  will 
be  found  that  the  sum  of  the  values  of  the  letters  in  each 
name  exactly  indicates  the  number  of  the  party m. 

A  number  of  such  coincidences,  often  of  a  very  curious 
character,  might  be  adduced,  and  the  probability  against 
the  occurrence  of  each  may  be  enormously  great.  They 
must  be  attributed  to  chance,  because  they  cannot  be 
shown  to  have  the  slightest  connexion  with  the  general 
laws  of  nature  ;  but  persons  are  often  found  to  be  greatly 
influenced  by  such  coincidences,  regarding  them  as  evidence 
of  fatality,  that  is  of  a  system  of  causation  governing 
human  affairs  independently  of  the  ordinary  laws  of  nature. 
Let  it  be  remembered  that  there  are  an  infinite  number  of 
opportunities  in  life  for  some  strange  coincidence  to  pre 
sent  itself,  so  that  it  is  quite  to  be  expected  that  remark 
able  conjunctions  will  sometimes  happen. 

m  S.  B.  Gould's  'Curious  Myths,'  p.  222. 
X 


306  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

In  all  matters  of  judicial  evidence,  we  must  bear  in 
mind  the  necessary  occurrence  from  time  to  time  of  un 
accountable  coincidences.  The  Roman  jurists  refused  for 
this  reason  to  invalidate  a  testamentary  deed,  the  wit 
nesses  of  which  had  sealed  it  with  the  same  seal.  For 
witnesses  independently  using  their  own  seals  miglit  be 
found  to  possess  identical  ones  by  accident".  It  is  well 
known  that  circumstantial  evidence  of  apparently  over 
whelming  completeness  will  sometimes  lead  to  a  mistaken 
judgment,  and  as  absolute  certainty  is  never  really  attain 
able,  every  court  must  act  upon  probabilities  of  a  very 
high  amount,  and  in  a  certain  small  proportion  of  cases 
they  must  almost  of  necessity  condemn  the  innocent 
victims  of  a  remarkable  conjuncture  of  circumstances0. 
Popular  judgments  usually  turn  upon  probabilities  of 
far  less  amount,  as  when  the  palace  of  Nicomedia,  and 
even  the  bedchamber  of  Diocletian,  having  been  on  fire 
twice  within  fifteen  days,  the  people  entirely  refused  to 
believe  that  it  could  be  the  result  of  accident.  The 
Romans  believed  that  there  was  a  fatality  connected  with 
the  name  of  Sextus. 

'  Semper  sub  Sextis  perdita  Roma  fuit.' 

The  utmost  precautions  will  not  provide  against  all 
contingencies.  To  avoid  errors  in  important  calculations, 
it  is  usual  to  have  them  repeated  by  different  computers, 
but  a  case  is  on  record  in  which  three  computers  made 
exactly  the  same  calculations  of  the  place  of  a  star,  a,nd 
yet  all  did  it  wrong  in  precisely  the  same  manner,  for  no 
apparent  reason  P. 

n  Possunt  autem  omnes  testes  et  uno  annulo  signare  testamentum. 
Quid  enim  si  septem  annul!  una  sculptura  fuerint,  secundum  quod  Pom- 
ponio  visum  estl — 'Justinian/  ii.  tit.  x.  5. 

0  See  Wills  on  '  Circumstantial  Evidence,'  p.  148. 

P  '  Memoirs  of  the  Koyal  Astronomical  Society,'  vol.  iv.  p.  290,  quoted 
by  Lardner,  'Edinburgh  Review,'  July  1834,  p.  278. 


THE  INDUCTIVE  OR  INVERSE  METHOD.  307 


Summary  of  the  Theory  of  Inductive  Inference. 

The  theory  of  inductive  inference  adopted  in  this  and 
the  previous  chapter,  was  chiefly  suggested  by  the  study 
of  the  Inverse  Method  of  Probabilities,  but  it  also  bears 
much  resemblance  to  the  so-called  Deductive  Method 
described  by  Mr.  J.  S.  Mill,  in  his  well  known  '  System  of 
Logic Q/  Mr.  Mill's  views  concerning  the  Deductive  Method, 
probably  form  the  most  original  and  valuable  part  of  his 
treatise,  and  I  should  have  ascribed  the  doctrine  entirely 
to  him,  had  I  not  found  that  the  opinions  put  forward  in 
other  parts  of  his  work  are  entirely  inconsistent  with  the 
theory  here  upheld.  As  this  subject  is  the  most  impor 
tant  and  difficult  one  with  which  we  have  to  deal,  I  will 
try  to  remedy  the  imperfect  manner  in  which  I  have 
treated  it,  by  giving  a  brief  recapitulation  of  the  views 
adopted. 

All  inductive  reasoning  is  but  an  inverse  application 
of  deductive  reasoning.  Being  in  possession  of  certain 
particular  facts  or  events  expressed  in  propositions,  we 
imagine  some  more  general  proposition  expressing  the 
existence  of  a  law  or  cause  ;  and,  deducing  the  particular 
results  of  that  supposed  general  proposition,  we  observe 
whether  they  agree  with  the  facts  in  question.  Hypo 
thesis  is  thus  always  employed,  consciously  or  unconsci 
ously.  The  sole  conditions  to  which  we  need  conform  in 
framing  any  hypothesis  is,  that  we  both  have  and  exercise 
the  power  of  inferring  deductively  from  the  hypothesis, 
to  the  particular  logical  combinations  or  results,  which  are 
to  be  compared  with  the  known  facts.  Thus  there  are 
but  three  steps  in  the  process  of  induction  : — 

(i)  Framing  of  some  hypothesis  as  to  the  character  of 
the  general  law. 

q  Book  iii.  chap.  u. 
X  2 


308  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

(2)  Deducing  consequences  from  that  law. 

(3)  Observing  whether  the  consequences  agree  with  the 
particular  facts  under  consideration. 

In  very  simple  cases  of  inverse  reasoning,  hypothesis 
may  sometimes  seem  altogether  needless.  Thus,  to  take 
numbers  again  as  a  convenient  illustration,  I  have  only 
to  look  at  the  series, 

i,   2,  4,  8,   16,  32,  &c., 

to  know  at  once  that  the  general  law  is  that  of  geo 
metrical  progression  ;  I  need  no  successive  trial  of  vari 
ous  hypotheses,  because  I  am  familiar  with  the  series, 
and  have  long  since  learnt  from  what  general  formula 
it  proceeds.  In  the  same  way  a  mathematician  becomes 
acquainted  with  the  integrals  of  a  number  of  common 
formulae,  so  that  we  have  no  need  to  go  through  any  pro 
cess  of  discovery.  But  it  is  none  the  less  true  that  when 
ever  previous  reasoning  does  not  furnish  the  knowledge, 
hypotheses  must  be  framed  and  tried.  (See  p.  142.) 

There  naturally  arise  two  different  cases,  according  as 
the  nature  of  the  subject  admits  of  certain  or  only  pro 
bable  deductive  reasoning.  Certainty,  indeed,  is  but  a 
singular  case  of  probability,  and  the  general  principles  of 
procedure  are  always  the  same.  Nevertheless,  when 
certainty  of  inference  is  possible  the  process  is  simplified. 
Of  several  mutually  inconsistent  hypotheses,  the  results  of 
which  can  be  certainly  compared  with  fact,  but  one  hypo 
thesis  can  ultimately  be  entertained.  Thus  in  the  inverse 
logical  problem,  two  logically  distinct  conditions  could  not 
yield  the  same  series  of  possible  combinations.  Accord 
ingly  in  the  case  of  two  terms  we  had  to  choose  one  of 
seven  different  kinds  of  propositions,  or  in  the  case  of 
three  terms,  our  choice  lay  among  192  possible  distinct 
hypotheses  (pp.  1 54-1 64).  Natural  laws,  however,  are  often 
quantitative  in  character,  and  the  possible  hypotheses  are 
then  infinite  in  varietv. 


THE  INDUCTIVE  OE  INVERSE  METHOD.  309 

When  deduction  is  certain,  comparison  with  fact  is 
needed  only  to  assure  ourselves  that  we  have  rightly 
selected  the  hypothetical  conditions.  The  law  establishes 
itself,  and  no  number  of  particular  verifications  can  add 
to  its  probability.  Having  once  deduced  from  the  prin 
ciples  of  algebra  that  the  difference  of  the  squares  of  two 
numbers  is  equal  to  the  product  of  their  sum  and  dif 
ference,  no  number  of  particular  trials  of  its  truth  will 
render  it  more  certain.  On  the  other  hand,  no  finite 
number  of  particular  verifications  of  a  supposed  law  will 
render  that  law  certain.  In  short,  certainty  belongs  only 
to  the  deductive  process,  and  to  the  teachings  of  direct 
intuition ;  and  as  the  conditions  of  nature  are  not  given 
by  intuition,  we  can  only  be  certain  that  we  have  got  a 
correct  hypothesis  when,  out  of  a  limited  number  con 
ceivably  possible,  we  select  that  one  which  alone  agrees 
with  the  facts  to  be  explained. 

In  geometry  and  kindred  branches  of  mathematics, 
deductive  reasoning  is  conspicuously  certain,  and  it  would 
often  seem  as  if  the  consideration  of  a  single  diagram 
yields  us  certain  knowledge  of  a  general  proposition. 
But  in  reality  all  this  certainty  is  of  a  purely  hypothetical 
character.  Doubtless  if  we  could  ascertain  that  a  sup 
posed  circle  was  a  true  and  perfect  circle,  we  could  be 
certain  concerning  a  multitude  of  its  geometrical  pro 
perties.  But  geometrical  figures  are  physical  objects,  and 
the  senses  can  never  assure  us  as  to  their  exact  forms. 
The  figures  really  treated  in  Euclid's  'Elements'  are 
imaginary,  and  we  never  can  verify  in  practice  the  con 
clusions  which  we  draw  with  certainty  in  inference ; 
questions  of  degree  and  probability  enter. 

Passing  now  to  subjects  in  which  deduction  is  only 
probable,  it  ceases  to  be  possible  to  adopt  one  hypothesis 
to  the  exclusion  of  the  others.  We  must  entertain  at  the 
same  time  all  conceivable  hypotheses,  and  regard  each 


310  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

with   the    degree  of  esteem  proportionate  to  its  proba 
bility.     We  go  through  the  same  steps  as  before. 

(1)  We  frame  an  hypothesis. 

(2)  We  deduce  the  probability  of  various  series  of  pos 
sible  consequences. 

(3)  We  compare  the  consequences  with  the  particular 
facts,  and  observe  the  probability  that  such  facts  would 
happen  under  the  hypothesis. 

The  above  processes  must  be  performed  for  every  con 
ceivable  hypothesis,  and  then  the  absolute  probability  of 
each  will  be  yielded  by  the  principle  of  the  inverse 
method  (p.  279).  As  in  the  case  of  certainty  we  accept 
that  hypothesis  which  certainly  gives  the  required  results, 
so  now  we  accept  as  most  probable  that  hypothesis  which 
most  probably  gives  the  results ;  but  we  are  obliged  to 
entertain  at  the  same  time  all  other  hypotheses  with 
degrees  of  probability  proportionate  to  the  probabilities 
that  they  would  give  the  results. 

So  far  we  have  treated  only  of  the  process  by  which 
we  pass  from  special  facts  to  general  laws,  that  inverse 
application  of  deduction  which  constitutes  induction. 
But  the  direct  employment  of  deduction  is  often  com 
bined  with  the  inverse.  No  sooner  have  we  established 
a  general  law,  than  the  mind  rapidly  draws  other  particular 
consequences  from  it.  In  geometry  we  may  almost  seem 
to  infer  that  because  one  equilateral  triangle  is  equi 
angular,  therefore  another  is  so.  In  reality  it  is  not 
because  one  is  that  another  is,  but  because  all  are.  The 
geometrical  conditions  are  perfectly  general,  and  by  what  is 
sometimes  called  parity  of  reasoning  whatever  is  true  of 
one  equilateral  triangle,  so  far  as  it  is  equilateral,  is  true 
of  all  equilateral  triangles. 

Similarly,  in  all  other  cases  of  inductive  inference, 
where  we  seem  to  pass  from  some  particular  instances  to 
a  new  instance,  we  go  through  the  same  process.  We 


THE  INDUCTIVE  OR  INVERSE  METHOD.  311 

form  an  hypothesis  as  to  the  logical  conditions  under 
which  the  given  instances  might  occur;  we  calculate 
inversely  the  probability  of  that  hypothesis,  and  com 
pounding  this  with  the  probability  that  a  new  instance 
would  proceed  from  the  same  conditions,  we  gain  the 
absolute  probability  of  occurrence  of  the  new  instance  in 
virtue  of  this  hypothesis.  But  as  several,  or  many,  or 
even  an  infinite  number  of  mutually  inconsistent  hypo 
theses  may  be  possible,  we  must  repeat  the  calculation  for 
each  such  conceivable  hypothesis,  and  then  the  complete 
probability  of  the  future  instance  will  be  the  sum  of  the 
separate  probabilities.  The  complication  of  this  process 
is  often  very  much  reduced  in  practice,  owing  to  the  fact 
that  one  hypothesis  may  be  nearly  certainly  true,  and 
other  hypotheses,  though  conceivable,  may  be  so  im 
probable  as  to  be  neglected  without  appreciable  error. 
But  when  we  possess  no  knowledge  whatever  of  the  con 
ditions  from  which  the  events  proceed,  we  may  be  unable 
to  form  any  probable  hypotheses  as  to  their  mode  of 
origin.  We  have  now  to  fall  back  upon  the  general 
solution  of  the  problem  effected  by  Laplace,  which  consists 
in  admitting  on  an  equal  footing  every  conceivable  ratio 
of  favourable  and  unfavourable  chances  for  the  production 
of  the  event,  and  then  accepting  the  aggregate  result  as 
the  best  which  can  be  obtained.  This  solution  is  only  to 
be  accepted  in  the  absence  of  all  better  means,  but  like 
other  results  of  the  calculus  of  probabilities,  it  comes 
to  our  aid  where  knowledge  is  at  an  end  and  ignorance 
begins,  and  it  prevents  us  from  over-estimating  the  know 
ledge  we  possess.  The  general  results  of  the  solution  are 
in  accordance  with  common  sense,  namely,  that  the  more 
often  an  event  has  happened  the  more  probable,  as  a 
general  rule,  is  its  subsequent  occurrence.  With  the 
extension  of  experience  this  probability  indefinitely  in 
creases,  but  at  the  same  time  the  probability  is  slight 


312  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

that  events  will  long  continue  to  happen  as  they  have 
previously  happened. 

We  have  now  pursued  the  theory  of  inductive  inference, 
as  far  as  can  be  done  with  regard  to  simple  logical  or 
numerical  relations.  The  laws  of  nature  deal  with  time 
and  space,  which  are  indefinitely,  or  rather  infinitely,  divi 
sible.  As  we  passed  from  pure  logic  to  numerical  logic, 
so  we  must  now  pass  from  questions  of  discontinuous, 
to  questions  of  continuous  quantity,  encountering  fresh 
considerations  of  much  difficulty.  Before,  therefore,  we 
consider  how  the  great  inductions  and  generalizations  of 
physical  science  illustrate  the  views  of  inductive  reason 
ing  just  explained,  we  must  break  off  for  a  time,  and 
review  the  means  which  we  possess  of  measuring  and 
comparing  magnitudes  of  time,  space,  mass,  force,  mo 
mentum,  energy,  and  the  various  manifestations  of  energy 
in  motion,  heat,  electricity,  chemical  change,  and  the  other 
phenomena  of  nature. 


BOOK  III. 

METHODS   OF  MEASUREMENT. 


CHAPTER   XIII. 

THE  EXACT  MEASUREMENT  OF  PHENOMENA. 

As  physical  science  advances,  it  becomes  more  and 
more  accurately  quantitative.  Questions  of  simple  logical 
fact  after  a  time  resolve  themselves  into  questions  of 
degree,  time,  distance,  or  weight.  Forces  hardly  suspected 
to  exist  by  one  generation,  are  clearly  recognised  by  the 
next,  and  precisely  measured  by  the  third  generation. 
But  one  condition  of  this  rapid  advance  is  the  invention 
of  suitable  instruments  of  measurement.  We  need  what 
Francis  Bacon  called  Instantice  citantes,  or  evocantes, 
methods  of  rendering  minute  phenomena  perceptible  to 
the  senses ;  and  we  also  require  Instantice  radii  or  curri- 
culi,  that  is  measuring  instruments3.  Accordingly,  the 
introduction  of  a  new  instrument  often  forms  an  epoch  in 
the  history  of  science.  As  Davy  said,  '  Nothing  tends  so 
much  to  the  advancement  of  knowledge  as  the  application 
of  a  new  instrument.  The  native  intellectual  powers  of 
men  in  different  times,  are  not  so  much  the  causes  of  the 
different  success  of  their  labours,  as  the  peculiar  nature 
of  the  means  and  artificial  resources  in  their  possession13'. 

In  the  absence  indeed  of  advanced  theory  and  analyti- 

a  '  Novum  Orgaiium,'  bk.  ii.     Aphorisms  40,  45  and  46. 
b  'Chemical  Philosophy/  Works,  vol.  iv.  p.  39.     Quoted  by  Young, 
"Works,  vol.  i.  p.  576. 


314  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

cal  power,  a  very  precise  instrument  would  be  useless. 
Measuring  apparatus  and  mathematical  theory  should  ad- 
vanceparipassu,  and  with  just  such  precision  as  the  theorist 
can  anticipate  results,  the  experimentalist  should  be  able 
to  compare  them  with  experience.  The  laborious  and  scrupu 
lously  accurate  observations  of  Flamsteed,  were  the  proper 
complement  to  the  intense  mathemetical  powers  of  Newton. 
Every  branch  of  knowledge  commences  with  quantita 
tive  notions  of  a  very  rude  character.  After  we  have  far 
progressed,  it  is  often  amusing  to  look  back  into  the 
infancy  of  the  science,  and  contrast  present  with  past 
methods.  At  Greenwich  Observatory  in  the  present  day, 
the  hundredth  part  of  a  second  is  not  thought  an  in 
considerable  portion  of  time.  The  ancient  Chaldseans 
recorded  an  eclipse  to  the  nearest  hour,  and  even  the 
early  Alexandrian  astronomers  thought  it  superfluous  to 
distinguish  between  the  edge  and  centre  of  the  sun. 
By  the  introduction  of  the  astrolabe,  Ptolemy  and  the 
later  Alexandrian  astronomers  could  determine  the  places 
of  the  heavenly  bodies  within  about  ten  minutes  of  arc. 
But  little  progress  then  ensued  for  thirteen  centuries, 
until  Tycho  Brahe  made  the  first  -great  step  towards 
accuracy,  not  only  by  employing  better  instruments, 
but  even  more  by  ceasing  to  regard  an  instrument 
as  correct.  Tycho,  in  fact,  determined  the  errors  of  his 
instruments,  and  corrected  his  observations.  He  also  took 
notice  of  the  effects  of  atmospheric  refraction,  and  suc 
ceeded  in  attaining  an  accuracy  often  sixty  times  as  great 
as  that  of  Ptolemy.  Yet  Tycho  and  Hevelius  often  erred 
several  minutes  in  the  determination  of  a  star's  place,  and 
it  was  a  great  achievement  of  Rcemer  and  Flamsteed  to 
reduce  this  error  to  seconds.  Bradley,  the  modern  Hip- 
parchus,  carried  on  the  improvement,  his  errors  in  right 
ascension  being  under  one  second  of  time,  and  those  of 
declination  under  four  seconds  of  arc  according  to  Bessel. 


THE  EXACT  MEASUREMENT  OF  PHENOMENA.      315 

In  the  present  day  the  average  error  of  a  single  observa 
tion  is  probably  reduced  to  the  half  or  quarter  of  what  it 
was  in  Bradley 's  time;  and  further  extreme  accuracy  is 
attained  by  the  multiplication  of  observations,  and  their 
skilful  combination  according  to  the  theory  of  error. 

Some  of  the  more  important  constants,  for  instance  that 
of  nutation,  have  been  determined  within  the  tenth  part 
of  a  second  of  space0. 

It  would  be  a  matter  of  great  interest  to  trace  out  the 
dependence  of  this  vast  progress  upon  the  introduction  of 
new  instruments.  The  astrolabe  of  Plotemy,  the  tele 
scope  of  Galileo,  the  pendulum  of  Galileo  and  Huygens, 
the  micrometer  of  Horrocks,  and  the  telescopic  sights  and 
micrometer  of  Gascoygne  and  Picard,  Koemer's  transit  in 
strument,  Newton's  and  Hadley's  quadrant,  Dollond's 
achromatic  lenses,  Harrison's  chronometer,  and  Eamsden's 
dividing  engine — such  were  some  of  the  principal  addi 
tions  to.  astronomical  apparatus.  The  result  is,  that  we 
now  take  note  of  quantities,  300,000  or  400,000  times  as 
small  as  in  the  time  of  the  Chaldseans. 

It  would  be  interesting  again  to  compare  the  scrupulous 
accuracy  of  a  modern  trigonometrical  survey  with  Erato 
sthenes'  rude  but  ingenious  guess  at  the  difference  of  lati 
tude  between  Alexandria  and  Syene — or  with  Norwood's 
measurement  of  a  degree  of  latitude  in  1635.  '  Sometimes 
I  measured,  sometimes  I  paced/  said  Norwood ;  '  and  I 
believe  I  am  within  a  scantling  of  the  truth/  Such  was 
the  germ  of  those  elaborate  geodesical  measurements 
which  have  made  the  dimensions  of  the  globe  known  to 
us  within  a  few  hundred  yards. 

In  other  branches  of  science,  the  invention  of  an  instru 
ment  has  usually  marked,  if  it  has  not  made,  an  epoch. 
The  science  of  heat  might  be  said  to  commence  with  the 

c  Baily,  'British  Association  Catalogue  of  Stars,'  pp.  "7,  23. 


316  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

construction  of  the  thermometer,  and  it  has  recently  been 
advanced  by  the  introduction  of  the  thermo-electric  pile. 
Chemistry  has  been  created  chiefly  by  the  careful  use  of 
the  balance,  which  forms  a  unique  instance  of  an  instru 
ment  remaining  substantially  in  the  form  in  which  it  was 
first  applied  to  scientific  purposes  by  Archimedes.  The 
balance  never  has  been  and  probably  never  can  be  im 
proved,  except  in  details  of  construction.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  torsion  balance,  introduced  by  Coulomb  towards 
the  end  of  last  century,  has  rapidly  become  essential  in 
many  branches  of  investigation.  In  the  hands  of  Caven 
dish  and  Baily,  it  gave  a  determination  of  the  earth's 
density ;  applied  in  the  galvanometer,  it  gave  a  delicate 
measure  of  electrical  forces,  and  was  essential  to  the 
introduction  of  the  thermo-electric  pile.  This  balance  is 
made  by  simply  suspending  any  light  rod  by  a  thin  wire 
or  thread  attached  to  the  middle  point.  And  we  owe  to 
it  almost  all  the  more  delicate  investigations  in  the  theo 
ries  of  heat,  electricity,  and  magnetism. 

Though  we  can  now  take  note  of  the  millionth  of  an 
inch  in  space,  and  the  millionth  of  a  second  in  time,  wre 
must  not  overlook  the  fact  that  in  other  operations  of 
science  we  are  yet  in  the  position  of  the  Chaldeeans.  Not 
many  years  have  elapsed  since  the  magnitudes  of  the 
stars,  meaning  the  amount  of  light  they  send  to  the 
observer's  eye,  were  guessed  at  in  the  rudest  manner,  and 
the  astronomer  adjudged  a  star  to  this  or  that  order  of 
magnitude  by  a  rough  comparison  with  other  stars  of  the 
same  order.  To  the  late  Sir  John  Herschel  we  owe  an 
attempt  to  introduce  an  uniform  method  of  measurement 
and  expression,  bearing  some  relation  to '  the  real  photo 
metric  magnitudes  of  the  stars'*.  Previous  to  the  re- 

d  'Outlines  of  Astronomy,'  4th  ed.  sect.  781,  p.  522.  'Eesults  of  Ob 
servations  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,'  &c.,  p.  371. 


THE  EXACT  MEASUREMENT  OF  PHENOMENA.      317 

searches  of  Bunsen  and  Roscoe  on  the  chemical  action  of 
light,  we  were  absolutely  devoid  of  any  mode  of  measuring 
the  energy  of  light ;  even  now  the  methods  are  tedious, 
and  it  is  not  clear  that  they  give  the  energy  of  light  so 
much  as  one  of  its  special  effects.  Many  natural  phe 
nomena  have  hardly  yet  been  made  the  subject  of  mea 
surement  at  all,  such  as  the  intensity  of  sound,  the  phe 
nomena  of  taste  and  smell,  the  magnitude  of  atoms,  the 
temperature  of  the  electric  spark  or  of  the  sun's  photo 
sphere. 

To  suppose,  then,  that  quantitative  science  treats  only  of 
exactly  measurable  quantities,  is  a  gross  if  it  be  a  common 
mistake.  Whenever  we  are  treating  of  an  event  which 
either  happens  altogether  or  does  not  happen  at  all,  we  are 
engaged  with  a  non-quantitative  phenomenon,  a  matter  of 
fact,  not  of  degree ;  but  whenever  a  thing  may  be  greater  or 
less,  or  twice  or  thrice  as  great  as  another,  whenever,  in  short, 
ratio  enters  even  in  the  rudest  manner,  there  science  will 
have  a  quantitative  character.  There  can  be  little  doubt, 
indeed,  that  every  science  as  it  progresses  will  become 
gradually  more  and  more  quantitative.  Numerical  pre 
cision  is  doubtless  the  very  soul  of  science,  as  Herschel 
said6,  and  as  all  natural  objects  exist  in  space,  and  involve 
molecular  movements,  measurable  in  velocity  and  extent, 
there  is  no  apparent  limit  to  the  ultimate  extension  of 
quantitative  science.  But  the  reader  must  not  for  a 
moment  suppose  that,  because  we  depend  more  and  more 
upon  mathematical  methods,  we  leave  logical  methods 
behind  us.  Number,  as  I  have  endeavoured  to  show, 
is  logical  in  its  origin,  and  quantity  is  but  a  development 
of  number,  or  is  analogous  thereto. 

e  'Preliminary  Discourse  on  the  Study  of  Natural  Philosophy/  p.  122. 


318  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

Division  of  the  Subject. 

The  general  subject  of  quantitative  investigation  will 
have  to  be  divided  into  several  parts.  We  shall,  firstly, 
consider  the  means  at  our  disposal  for  measuring  phe 
nomena,  and  thus  rendering  them  more  or  less  amenable 
to  mathematical  treatment.  This  task  will  involve  an 
analysis  of  the  principles  on  which  accurate  methods  of 
measurement  are  founded,  forming  the  subject  of  the 
remainder  of  the  present  chapter.  As  measurement,  how 
ever,  only  yields  ratios,  we  have  in  the  next  chapter 
(XIV)  to  consider  the  establishment  of  unitary  mag 
nitudes,  in  terms  of  which  our  results  may  be  expressed. 
As  every  phenomenon  is  usually  the  sum  of  several  dis 
tinct  quantities  proceeding  from  different  causes,  we  have 
next  to  investigate  in  Chapter  XV  the  methods  by  which 
we  may  disentangle  complicated  effects,  and  refer  each 
part  of  the  joint  effect  to  its  separate  cause. 

It  yet  remains  for  us  in  subsequent  chapters  to  treat  of 
quantitative  induction,  properly  so  called.  We  must 
follow  out  the  inverse  logical  method,  as  it  presents  itself 
in  problems  of  a  far  higher  degree  of  difficulty  than  those 
which  treat  of  objects  related  in  a  simple  logical  manner, 
and  incapable  of  merging  into  each  other  by  addition  and 
subtraction. 

Continuous  Quantity. 

The  phenomena  of  nature  are  for  the  most  part  mani 
fested  in  quantities  which  increase  or  decrease  continu 
ously.  When  we  inquire  into  the  precise  meaning  of 
continuous  quantity,  we  find  that  it  can  only  be  described 
as  that  which  is  divisible  without  limit.  We  can  divide 
a  millemetre  into  ten,  or  one  hundred,  or  one  thousand,  or 
ten  thousand  parts,  and  mentally  at  any  rate  we  can  carry 


THE  EXACT  MEASUREMENT  OF  PHENOMENA.      319 

on  the  process  ad  infinitum.  Any  finite  space,  then,  must 
be  conceived  as  made  up  of  an  infinite  number  of  parts, 
each  of  which  must  consequently  be  infinitely  small.  We 
cannot  entertain  some  of  the  simplest  geometrical  notions 
without  allowing  this.  The  conception  of  a  square  in 
volves  the  conception  of  a  side  and  diagonal,  which,  as 
Euclid  admirably  proves  in  the  ii7th  proposition  of  his 
tenth  book,  have  no  common  measure f,  meaning,  as  I 
apprehend,  no  finite  common  measure.  Incommensurable 
quantities  are,  in  fact,  those  which  have  for  their  only 
common  measure  an  infinitely  small  quantity.  It  is 
somewhat  startling  to  find,  too,  that  in  theory  incommen 
surable  quantities  will  be  infinitely  more  frequent  than 
commensurable.  Let  any  two  lines  be  drawn  haphazard  ; 
it  is  infinitely  unlikely  that  they  will  be  commensurable, 
so  that  the  commensurable  quantities,  which  we  are  sup 
posed  to  deal  with  in  practice,  are  but  singular  cases 
among  an  infinitely  greater  number  of  incommensurable 
cases. 

Practically,  however,  we  treat  all  quantities  as  made  up 
of  the  least  quantities  which  our  senses,  assisted  by  the 
best  measuring  instruments,  can  appreciate.  So  long  as 
microscopes  were  unin vented,  it  was  sufficient  to  regard 
an  inch  as  made  up  of  a  thousand  thousandths  of  an 
inch ;  now  we  must  treat  it  as  composed  of  a  million 
millionths.  We  might  apparently  avoid  all  mention  of 
infinitely  small  quantities,  by  never  carrying  our  approxi 
mations  beyond  quantities,  which  the  senses  can  appreciate. 
In  geometry,  as  thus  treated,  we  should  never  assert  two 
quantities  to  be  equal,  but  only  to  be  apparently  equal. 
Legendre  really  adopts  this  mode  of  treatment  in  the 
twentieth  proposition  of  the  first  book  of  his  Geometry ; 
and  it  is  practically  adopted  throughout  the  physical 
sciences,  as  we  shall  afterwards  see.  But  though  our 

f  See  De  Morgan,  'Study  of  Mathematics/  in  TJ.  K.  S.  Library,  p.  81. 


320  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

fingers,  and  senses,  and  instruments  must  stop  somewhere, 
there  is  no  reason  why  the  mind  should  not  go  on.  We 
can  see  that  a  proof  which  is  only  carried  through  a  few 
steps,  in  fact,  might  be  carried  on  without  limit,  and  it  is 
this  consciousness  of  no  stopping  place,  which  renders 
Euclid's  proof  of  his  1 1 7th  proposition  so  impressive.  Try 
how  we  will  to  circumvent  the  matter,  we  cannot  really 
avoid  the  consideration  of  the  infinitely  small  and  the 
infinitely  great.  The  same  methods  of  approximation 
which  seem  confined  to  the  finite,  mentally  extend  them 
selves  to  the  infinite  £. 

One  result  which  immediately  follows  from  these  con 
siderations  is,  that  we  cannot  possibly  adjust  any  two 
quantities  in  absolute  equality.  The  suspension  of  Ma 
homet's  coffin  between  two  precisely  equal  magnets,  is 
theoretically  conceivable  but  practically  impossible.  The 
story  of  the  '  Merchant  of  Venice,'  turns  upon  the  infinite 
improbability,  that  an  exact  quantity  of  flesh  could  be 
cut.  Unstable  equilibrium  cannot  exist  in  nature,  for  it 
is  that  which  is  destroyed  by  an  infinitely  small  displace 
ment.  It  might  be  possible  to  balance  an  egg  on  its  end 
practically,  because  no  egg  has  a  surface  of  perfect  curva 
ture.  Suppose  the  egg  shell  to  be  perfectly  smooth,  and 
the  feat  would  become  impossible. 

The  Fallacious  Indications  of  the  Senses. 

I  may  briefly  remind  the  reader  how  little  we  can  trust 
to  our  unassisted  senses  in  estimating  the  degree,  quantity, 
or  magnitude  of  any  phenomenon.  The  eye  cannot  cor 
rectly  estimate  the  comparative  brightness  of  two  lumi 
nous  bodies  which  differ  much  in  brilliancy ;  for  we  know 
that  the  iris  is  constantly  adjusting  itself  to  the  intensity 

8  Lacroix,  '  Essai  sur  1'Enseignement  ou  maniere  d'dtudier  les  Mathe- 
matiques/  2nd  ed.  Paris,  1816,  pp.  292-294. 


THE  EXACT  MEASUREMENT  OF  PHENOMENA.      321 

of  the  light  received,  and  thus  admits  more  or  less  light 
according  to  circumstances.  The  moon  which  shines  with 
almost  dazzling  brightness  by  night,  is  pale  and  nearly 
imperceptible  while  the  eye  is  yet  affected  by  the  vastly 
more  powerful  light  of  day.  Much  has  been  recorded 
concerning  the  comparative  brightness  of  the  zodiacal 
light  at  different  times  h,  but  it  would  be  difficult  to  prove 
that  these  changes  are  not  due  to  the  varying  darkness 
at  the  time,  or  the  different  acuteness  of  the  observer's 
eye.  For  a  like  reason  it  is  exceedingly  difficult  to  esta 
blish  the  existence  of  any  change  in  the  form  or  compara 
tive  brightness  of  nebula?  ;  the  appearance  of  a  nebula 
greatly  depends  upon  the  keenness  of  sight  of  the  ob 
server,  or  the  accidental  condition  of  freshness  or  fatigue 
of  his  eye;  the  same  is  true  of  lunar  observations';  and 
even  the  use  of  the  best  telescope  fails  to  remedy  this 
difficulty.  In  judging  of  colours  again,  we  must  remember 
that  light  of  any  given  colour  tends  to  dull  the  sensibility 
of  the  eye  for  light  of  the  same  colour. 

Nor  is  the  eye  when  unassisted  by  instruments  a  much 
better  judge  of  magnitude.  Our  estimates  of  the  size  of 
minute  bright  points,  such  as  the  fixed  stars,  are  com 
pletely  falsified  by  the  effects  of  irradiation.  Tycho  calcu 
lated  from  the  apparent  size  of  the  star-discs,  that  no 
one  of  the  principal  fixed  stars  could  be  contained  within 
the  area  of  the  earth's  orbit.  Apart,  however,  from  irradia 
tion  or  other  distinct  causes  of  error,  our  visual  estimates 
of  sizes  and  shapes  are  often  astonishingly  incorrect. 
Artists  almost  invariably  draw  distant  mountains  or  other 
objects  in  ludicrous  disproportion  to  nearer  objects,  as  a 
comparison  of  a  sketch  with  a  photograph  at  once  shows. 
The  extraordinary  apparent  difference  of  size  of  the  sun 

11  'Cosmos,'  Translated  by  Ottd,  vol.  i.  pp.  131-134. 
i  'Report  of  the  British  Association,'  1871,  p.  84.     Grant's  'History 
of  Physical  Astronomy/  pp.  568-9. 

Y 


322  THE  PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

or  moon,  according  as  it  is  high  in  the  heavens  or  near 
the  horizon,  should  be  sufficient  to  make  us  cautious  in 
accepting  the  plainest  indications  of  our  senses,  unassisted 
by  instrumental  measurement.  As  to  statements  concern 
ing  the  height  of  the  aurora  and  the  distance  of  meteors, 
they  are  to  be  utterly  distrusted.  When  Captain  Parry 
says  that  a  ray  of  the  aurora  shot  suddenly  downwards 
between  him  and  the  land  which  was  only  3000  yards  dis 
tant,  we  must  consider  him  subject  to  an  error  of  sense1. 

It  is  true  that  errors  of  observation  are  more  usually 
errors  of  judgment  than  of  sense.  That  which  is  actually 
seen  must  be  truly  seen  so  far ;  and  if  we  correctly 
interpret  the  meaning  of  the  phenomenon,  there  would 
be  no  error  at  all.  But  the  weakness  of  the  bare  senses 
as  measuring  instruments,  arises  from  the  fact  that  they 
import  varying  conditions  of  unknown  amount,  and  we 
cannot  make  the  requisite  corrections  and  allowances  as  in 
the  case  of  a  solid  and  invariable  instrument. 

Bacon  has  excellently  stated  the  insufficiency  of  the 
senses  for  estimating  the  magnitudes  of  objects,  or  de 
tecting  the  degrees  in  which  phenomena  present  them 
selves.  '  Things  escape  the  senses/  he  saysm,  'because  the 
object  is  not  sufficient  in  quantity  to  strike  the  sense  :  as 
all  minute  bodies  ;  because  the  percussion  of  the  object  is 
too  great  to  be  endured  by  the  senses  :  as  the  form  of  the 
sun  when  looking  directly  at  it  in  mid- day ;  because  the 
time  is  not  proportionate  to  actuate  the  sense  :  as  the 
motion  of  a  bullet  in  the  air,  or  the  quick  circular  motion 
of  a  firebrand,  which  are  too  fast,  or  the  hour-hand  of 
a  common  clock,  which  is  too  slow ;  from  the  distance 
of  the  object  as  to  place:  as  the  size  of  the  celestial 
bodies,  and  the  size  and  nature  of  all  distant  bodies ; 

1  Loomis,  '  Ou  the  Aurora  Borealis.'     Smithsonian  Transactions,  quot 
ing  Parry's  Third  Voyage,  p.  61. 
m  '  Novnm  Organum.' 


THE  EXACT  MEASUREMENT  OF  PHENOMENA.      323 

from  prepossession  by  another  object :  as  one  powerful 
smell  renders  other  smells  in  the  same  room  imper 
ceptible  ;  from  the  interruption  of  interposing  bodies  : 
as  the  internal  parts  of  animals ;  and  because  the  object 
is  unfit  to  make  an  impression  upon  the  sense :  as  the 
air  or  the  invisible  and  untangible  spirit  which  is  in 
cluded  in  every  living  body/ 

Complexity   of  Quantitative.    Questions. 

One  remark  which  we  may  well  make  in  entering 
upon  quantitative  questions,  has  regard  to  the  great  variety 
and  extent  of  phenomena  presented  to  our  notice.  So 
long  as  we  deal  only  with  a  simply  logical  question,  that 
question  is  merely,  Does  a  certain  event  happen  \  or,  Does 
a  certain  object  exist  ?  No  sooner  do  we  regard  the  event 
or  object  as  capable  of  more  or  less,  than  one  question 
branches  out  into  many.  We  must  now  ask,  How  much 
is  it  compared  with  its  cause  or  necessary  condition  ? 
Does  it  change  when  the  amount  of  the  cause  changes  \ 
If  so,  does  it  change  in  the  same  or  opposite  direction  ?  Is 
the  change  in  simple  proportion  to  that  of  the  cause  \  If 
not,  what  more  complex  law  of  connection  holds  true  1 
This  law  determined  satisfactorily  in  one  series  of  cir 
cumstances  may  be  varied  under  new  conditions,  and  the 
most  complex  relations  of  several  quantities  may  ultimately 
be  established. 

In  every  question  of  physical  science  there  is  thus  a 
series  of  steps  of  progress,  the  first  one  or  two  of  which 
are  usually  made  with  ease,  while  the  succeeding  ones 
demand  more  and  more  careful  measurement.  We  cannot 
lay  down  any  single  invariable  series  of  questions  which 
must  be  asked  from  nature.  The  exact  character  of  the 
questions  will  vary  according  to  the  nature  of  the  case, 
but  they  will  usually  be  of  a  very  evident  kind,  and  we 
may  readily  illustrate  them  by  actual  examples.  Suppose, 

Y    2 


324  THE  PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

for  instance,  that  we  are  investigating  the  solution  of  some 
salt  in  water.  The  first  is  a  purely  logical  question  :  Is 
there  solution,  or  is  there  not  ?  Assuming  the  answer  to 
be  in  the  affirmative,  we  next  inquire,  Does  the  solubility 
vary  with  the  temperature,  or  not  I  In  all  probability 
some  variation  will  be  found  to  exist,  and  we  shall  have 
at  the  same  time  an  answer  to  the  further  question, 
Does  the  quantity  dissolved  increase,  or  does  it  dimmish 
with  the  temperature  ?  In  by  far  the  greatest  number  of 
cases  salts  and  substances  of  all  kinds  dissolve  more  freely 
the  higher  the  temperature  of  the  water,  but  there  are  a 
few  salts,  such  as  calcium  sulphate,  which  follow  the 
opposite  rule.  A  considerable  number  of  salts  resemble 
sodium  sulphate  in  becoming  more  soluble  up  to  a  certain 
temperature,  and  then  varying  in  the  opposite  direction. 
We  next  require  to  assign  the  amount  of  variation  as 
compared  with  that  of  the  temperature,  assuming  at  first 
that  the  increase  of  solubility  is  proportional  to  the  in 
crease  of  temperature.  Common  salt  is  an  instance  of 
very  slight  variation,  and  potassium  nitrate  of  very  con 
siderable  increase  with  temperature.  Very  accurate  ob 
servations  will  probably  show,  however,  that  the  simple 
law  of  proportionate  variation  is  only  approximately  true, 
and  some  more  complicated  law  involving  the  second, 
third,  or  higher  powers  of  the  temperature  may  ultimately 
be  established.  All  these  investigations  have  to  be 
carried  out  for  each  salt  separately,  since  no  distinct  prin 
ciples  by  which  we  may  infer  from  one  substance  to 
another  have  yet  been  detected.  There  is  still  an  in 
definite  field  for  further  research  open ;  for  the  solubility 
of  salts  would  probably  vary  with  the  pressure  under 
which  the  medium  is  placed  ;  the  presence  of  other  salts 
already  dissolved  may  have  effects  yet  unknown.  The 
researches  already  effected  as  regards  the  solvent  power  of 
water  must  be  repeated  as  regards  alcohol,  ether,  carbon 


THE  EXACT  MEASUREMENT  OF  PHENOMENA.      325 

bisulphide,  and  other  media,  so  that  unless  general  laws 
can  be  detected,  this  one  phenomenon  of  solution  can 
never  be  exhaustively  treated.  The  same  kind  of  questions 
recur  as  regards  the  solution  or  absorption  of  gases  in 
liquids,  the  pressure  as  well  as  the  temperature  having 
then  a  most  decided  effect,  and  Professor  Roscoe's  re 
searches  on  the  subject  present  an  excellent  example  of 
the  successive  determination  of  various  complicated  laws11. 

There  is  hardly  a  single  branch  of  scientific  research 
in  which  similar  complications  are  not  ultimately  en 
countered.  In  the  case  of  gravity,  indeed,  we  arrive  at 
the  final  law,  that  the  force  is  invariably  the  same  for  all 
kinds  of  matter,  and  depends  only  on  the  distance  of 
action.  But  in  other  subjects  the  laws,  if  simple  in  their 
ultimate  nature,  are  disguised  and  complicated  in  their 
apparent  results.  Thus  the  effect  of  heat  in  expanding 
solids,  or  the  reverse  effect  of  forcible  extension  or  com 
pression  upon  the  temperature  of  a  body,  will  vary 
from  one  substance  to  another,  will  vary  as  the  tem 
perature  is  already  higher  or  lower,  and  will  probably 
follow  a  highly  complex  law,  which  in  some  cases  gives 
negative  or  exceptional  results.  In  crystalline  substances 
the  same  researches  have  to  be  repeated  in  each  distinct 
axial  direction. 

In  the  sciences  of  pure  observation  again,  such  as  those 
of  astronomy,  meteorology,  and  terrestrial  magnetism,  we 
meet  with  many  interesting  series  of  quantitative  deter 
minations.  The  so-called  fixed  stars,  as  Giordano  Bruno 
divined,  are  not  really  fixed,  and  may  be  more  truly 
described  as  vast  wandering  orbs,  each  pursuing  its  own 
path  through  space.  We  must  then  determine  separately 
for  each  star  the  following  questions  : — 

1 .  Does  it  move  1 

2.  In  what  direction  I 

»  Watt's  'Dictionary  of  Chemistry,'  vol.  ii.  p.  790. 


326  THE   PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

3.  At  what  velocity  ? 

4.  Is  this  velocity  variable  or  uniform  ? 

5.  If  variable,  according  to  what  law  ? 

6.  Is  the  direction  uniform  ? 

7.  If  not,  what  is  the  form  of  the  apparent  path  ? 

The  successive  answers  to  such  questions  in  the  case  of 
certain  binary  stars,  have  afforded  a  proof  that  the 
motions  are  due  to  a  central  force  coinciding  in  law  with 
gravity,  and  doubtless  identical  with  it.  In  other  cases 
the  motions  are  usually  so  small  that  it  is  exceedingly 
difficult  to  distinguish  them  with  certainty.  A  coincidence 
of  motions  in  some  constellations  has  been  pointed  out 
by  Mr.  Proctor,  and  the  parallactic  effect  due  to  the  sun's 
proper  motion  has  been  surely  detected  ;  but  the  time  is 
yet  far  off  when  any  general  results  as  regards  stellar 
motions  can  be  established. 

The  variation  in  the  brightness  of  stars  opens  an  un 
limited  field  for  curious  observation.  There  is  not  a  star 
in  the  heavens  concerning  which  we  might  not  have  to 
determine— 

1 .  Does  it  vary  in  brightness  1 

2.  Is  the  brightness  increasing  or  decreasing  ? 

3.  Is  the  variation  uniform,  that  is,  simply  proportional 
to  time "? 

4.  If  not,  according  to  what  law  does  it  vary  ? 

In  a  majority  of  cases  the  change  will  probably  be 
found  to  have  a  periodic  character,  in  which  case  several 
other  questions  will  arise,  such  as — 

5.  What  is  the  length  of  the  period  ? 

6.  Are     there     minor    periods    within    the    principal 
period  ? 

7.  What  is  the  form  or  law  of  variation  within  the 
period  ? 

8.  Is  there  any  change  in  the  amount  of  variation  ? 


THE  EXACT  MEASUREMENT  OF  PHENOMENA.      327 

9.  If  so,  is  it  a  secular,  i.  e.  a  continually  growing- 
change,  or  does  it  give  evidence  of  a  greater  period  I 

Already  the  periodic  changes  of  a  certain  number  of 
stars  have  been  determined  with  accuracy,  and  the  lengths 
of  the  periods  vary  from  less  than  three  days  up  to  in 
tervals  of  time  at  least  250  times  as  great.  Periods 
within  periods  have  also  been  detected0. 

There  is,  perhaps,  no  subject  in  which  more  complicated 
quantitative  conditions  have  to  be  determined  than  ter 
restrial  magnetism.  Since  the  time  when  the  declination 
of  the  compass  was  first  noticed,  as  some  suppose  by 
Columbus,  we  have  had  successive  discoveries  from  time 
to  time  of  the  progressive  change  of  declination  from 
century  to  century ;  of  the  periodic  character  of  this 
change  ;  of  the  difference  of  the  declination  in  various 
parts  of  the  earth's  surface  ;  of  the  varying  laws  of  the 
change  of  declination  ;  of  the  dip  or  inclination  of  the 
needle,  and  the  corresponding  laws  of  its  periodic  changes  ; 
the  horizontal  and  perpendicular  intensities  have  also 
been  the  subject  of  exact  measurement,  and  have  been 
found  to  vary  by  place  and  time,  like  the  directions  of  the 
needle  ;  daily  and  yearly  periodic  changes  have  also  been 
detected,  and  all  the  elements  are  found  to  be  subject  to 
occasional  storms  or  abnormal  perturbations,  in  which  the 
eleven  year  period,  now  known  to  be  common  to  many 
planetary  relations,  is  apparent.  The  complete  solution 
of  these  motions  of  the  compass  needle  involves  nothing 
less  than  a  determination  of  its  position  and  oscillations  in 
every  part  of  the  world  at  any  epoch,  the  like  deter 
mination  for  another  epoch,  and  so  on,  time  after  time, 
until  the  periods  of  all  changes  are  ascertained,  and  the 
character  of  the  variations  determined.  This  one  subject 
offers  to  men  of  science  an  almost  inexhaustible  field  for 

o  Humboldt's  'Cosmos,'  translated  by  Otte,  vol.  iii.  p.  228. 


328  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

interesting  quantitative  research  P,  in  which  we  shall 
doubtless  at  some  future  time  discover  the  operation  of 
causes  now  most  mysterious  and  unaccountable. 

The  Methods  of  Accurate  Measurement. 

In  studying  the  modes  by  which  physicists  have  ac 
complished  very  exact  measurements,  we  find  that  they 
are  very  various,  but  that  they  may  perhaps  be  reduced 
under  the  following  three  classes  : — 

1.  The   increase    or   decrease    of   the   quantity   to    be 
measured  in  some  determinate  ratio,  so  as  to   bring   it 
within  the  scope  of  our  senses,  and  to  equate  it  with  the 
standard  unit,  or  some  determinate  multiple  or  sub-mul 
tiple  of  this  unit. 

2.  The  discovery  of  some  natural  conjunction  of  events 
which  will  enable  us  to  compare  directly  the  multiples  of 
the  quantity  with  those  of  the  unit,  or  a  quantity  related 
in  a  definite  ratio  to  that  unit. 

3.  Indirect  measurement,  which  gives  us  not  the  quan 
tity  itself,  but  some  other  quantity  connected  with  it  by 
known  mathematical  relations. 

Conditions  of  Accurate  Measurement. 

Several  conditions  are  requisite  in  order  that  a  mea 
surement  may  be  made  with  great  accuracy,  and  that 
the  result  may  be  closely  accordant  when  several  inde 
pendent  measurements  are  made. 

In  the  first  place  the  magnitude  must  be  exactly  defined 
by  sharp  terminations,  or  precise  marks  of  inconsiderable 
thickness.  When  a  boundary  is  vague  and  graduated, 
like  the  penumbra  in  a  lunar  eclipse,  it  is  impossible  to 
say  where  the  end  really  is,  and  different  people  wih1  come 

P  Gauss,  'General  Theory  of  Terrestrial  Magnetism';  Taylor's 
'  Scientific  Memoirs,'  vol.  ii.  p,  228. 


THE  EXACT  MEASUREMENT  OF  PHENOMENA.      329 

to  different  results.  We  may  sometimes  overcome  this 
difficulty  to  a  certain  extent,  by  observations  repeated  in 
a  special  manner,  as  we  shall  afterwards  see ;  but  when 
possible,  we  should  choose  opportunities  for  measure 
ment  when  precise  definition  is  easy.  The  moment  of 
occultation  of  a  star  by  the  moon  can  be  observed  with 
great  accuracy,  because  the  star  disappears  with  perfect 
suddenness  ;  but  there  are  many  other  astronomical  con 
junctions,  eclipses,  transits,  &c.,  which  occupy  a  certain 
length  of  time  in  happening,  and  thus  open  the  way  to 
differences  of  opinion.  It  would  be  impossible  to  observe 
with  precision  the  movements  of  a  body  possessing  no 
definite  points  of  reference.  The  spots  on  the  sun,  for 
instance,  furnish  the  only  direct  criterion  of  its  rotation, 
and  the  possibility  that  these  spots  have  a  tendency  to 
move  in  one  direction  throws  a  doubt  upon  all  deter 
minations  of  the  sun's  axial  movement. 

The  colours  of  the  complete  spectrum  shade  with  perfect 
continuity  into  each  other,  so  that  their  separation  is 
entirely  an  arbitrary  matter.  Exact  determinations  of 
refractive  indices  would  have  been  impossible,  had  we  not 
the  fixed  dark  lines  of  the  solar  spectrum  as  precise  points 
for  measurement,  or,  what  comes  to  the  same  thing,  various 
kinds  of  homogeneous  light,  such  as  that  of  sodium,  pos 
sessing  a  nearly  uniform  length  of  vibration. 

In  the  second  place,  we  cannot  measure  accurately 
unless  we  have  the  means  either  of  multiplying  or  dividing 
a  quantity  without  considerable  error,  so  that  we  may 
correctly  equate  one  magnitude  with  the  multiple  or  sub- 
multiple  of  the  other.  In  some  cases  we  operate  upon  the 
quantity  to  be  measured,  and  bring  it  into  accurate  coin 
cidence  with  the  actual  standard,  as  when  in  photometry 
we  vary  the  distance  of  our  luminous  body,  until  its 
illuminating  power  at  a  certain  point  is  equal  to  that  of  a 
standard  lamp.  In  other  cases  we  repeat  the  unit  until  it 


330  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

equals  the  object,  as  in  surveying  land,  or  determining  a 
weight  by  the  balance.  The  requisites  of  accuracy  now 
are  :  —  (T)  That  we  can  repeat  unit  after  unit  of  exactly 
equal  magnitude  ;  (2)  That  these  can  be  joined  together 
so  that  the  aggregate  shall  really  be  the  sum  of  the 
parts.  The  same  conditions  apply  to  subdivision,  which 
may  be  regarded  as  a  multiplication  of  subordinate  units. 
In  order  to  measure  to  the  thousandth  of  an  inch,  we 
must  be  able  to  add  thousandth  after  thousandth  without 
error  in  the  magnitude  of  these  spaces,  or  in  their  con 
junction. 

The  condenser  electrometer,  as  remarked  by  Thomson 
and  Tait  <i,  is  a  good  example  of  an  instrument  unfitted  to 
give  any  sure  measure  of  electro-motive  force,  because  the 
friction  between  the  parts  of  the  condenser  often  produces 
more  electricity  than  the  original  quantity  which  was  to 
be  measured. 


Measuring  Instruments. 

To  consider  the  mechanical  construction  of  scientific 
instruments,  is  no  part  of  my  purpose  in  this  book.  I 
wish  to  point  out  merely  the  general  purpose  of  such 
instruments,  and  the  methods  adopted  to  carry  out  that 
purpose  with  great  precision.  In  the  first  place  we  must 
distinguish  between  the  instrument  which  effects  a  com 
parison  between  two  quantities,  and  the  standard  mag 
nitude  which  often  forms  one  of  the  quantities  compared. 
The  astronomer's  clock,  for  instance,  is  no  standard  of  the 
efflux  of  time  ;  it  serves  but  to  subdivide,  with  approxi 
mate  accuracy,  the  interval  of  successive  passages  of  a 
star  across  the  meridian,  which  it  may  effect  perhaps  to 
the  tenth  part  of  a  second,  or  -oV-uinr  part  of  the  whole. 

i  'Elements  of  Natural  Philosophy,'  sect.  326,  p.  108. 


THE  EXACT  MEASUREMENT  OF  PHENOMENA.     331 

The  moving  globe  itself  is  the  real  standard  clock,  and  the 
transit  instrument  the  finger  of  the  clock,  while  the  stars 
are  the  hour,  minute,  and  second  marks,  none  the  less 
useful  or  accurate  because  they  are  disposed  at  unequal 
intervals.  The  photometer  is  a  simple  instrument,  by 
which  we  compare  the  relative  intensity  of  rays  of  light 
falling  upon  a  given  spot.  The  galvanometer  shows  the 
comparative  intensity  of  electric  currents  passing  through 
a  wire.  The  calorimeter  guages  the  quantity  of  heat 
passing  from  a  given  object.  But  no  such  instruments 
furnish  the  standard  unit  in  terms  of  which  our  results  are 
to  be  expressed.  In  one  peculiar  case  alone  does  the  same 
instrument  combine  the  unit  of  measurement  and  the 
means  of  comparison.  A  theodolite,  mural  circle,  sextant, 
or  other  instrument  for  the  measurement  of  angular  mag 
nitudes  has  no  need  of  an  additional  physical  unit ;  for 
the  very  circle  itself,  or  complete  revolution,  is  the  natural 
unit  to  which  all  greater  or  lesser  amounts  of  angular 
magnitude  are  referred. 

The  result  of  every  measurement  is  to  make  known  the 
purely  numerical  ratio  existing  between  the  magnitude 
to  be  measured,  and  a  certain  other  magnitude,  which 
should,  when  possible,  be  a  fixed  unit  or  standard  magni 
tude,  or  at  least  an  intermediate  unit  of  which  the  value 
can  be  ascertained  in  terms  of  the  ultimate  standard.  But 
though  a  ratio  is  the  required  result,  an  equation  is  the 
mode  in  which  the  ratio  is  determined  and  expressed.  In 
every  measurement  we  equate  some  multiple  or  submul- 
tiple  of  one  quantity,  with  some  multiple  or  submultiple 
of  another,  and  equality  is  always  the  fact  which  we 
ascertain  by  the  senses.  By  the  eye,  the  ear,  or  the  touch, 
we  judge  whether  there  is  a  discrepancy  or  not  between 
two  lights,  two  sounds,  two  intervals  of  time,  two  bars  of 
metal.  Often  indeed  we  substitute  one  sense  for  the  other, 
as  when  the  efflux  of  time  is  judged  by  the  marks  upon 


332  THE   PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

a  moving  slip  of  paper,  so  that  equal  intervals  of  time  are 
represented  by  equal  lengths.  There  is,  perhaps,  a  ten 
dency  to  reduce  all  comparisons  to  the  comparison  of  space 
magnitudes,  but  in  any  case  one  of  the  senses  must  be  the 
ultimate  judge  of  coincidence  or  non-coincidence. 

Since  the  equation  to  be  established  may  exist  between 
any  multiples  or  submultiples  of  the  quantities  compared, 
there  naturally  arise  several  different  modes  of  comparison 
adapted  to  different  cases.  Let  p  be  the  magnitude  to 
be  measured,  and  q  that  in  terms  of  which  it  is  to  be 
expressed.  Then  we  wish  to  find  such  numbers  x  and  y, 

that  the  equation  p  =  ~q  may  be  true.     Now  this  same 

equation  may  be  presented  in  four  slightly  different  forms, 
namely  : — 

First  Form.          Second  Form.         Third  Form.          Fourth  Form. 
x  y  PI 

P  =  -  q  p~  =  q  py  =  qx  -  -  - 

y  x  x     y 

Each  of  these  modes  of  expressing  the  same  equation  cor 
responds  to  one  mode  of  effecting  a  measurement. 

When  the  standard  quantity  is  greater  than  that  to  be 
measured,  we  often  adopt  the  first  mode,  and  subdivide 
the  unit  until  we  get  a  magnitude  equal  to  that  measured. 
The  angles  observed  in  surveying,  in  astronomy,  or  in 
goniometry  are  usually  smaller  than  a  whole  revolution, 
and  the  measuring  circle  is  divided  by  the  use  of  the 
microscope  and  screw,  until  we  obtain  an  angle  undistin- 
guishable  from  that  observed.  The  dimensions  of  minute 
objects  are  determined  by  subdividing  the  inch  or  centi 
metre,  the  screw  micrometer  being  the  most  accurate 
means  of  subdivision.  Ordinary  temperatures  are  esti 
mated  by  division,  of  the  standard  interval  between  the 
freezing  and  boiling  points  of  water,  as  marked  on  a 
thermometer  tube. 

In  a  still  greater  number  of  cases,  perhaps,  we  multiply 


THE  EXACT  MEASUREMENT  OF  PHENOMENA.      333 

the  standard  unit  until  we  get  a  magnitude  equal  to  that 
to  be  measured.  Ordinary  measurement  by  a  foot  rule, 
a  surveyor's  chain,  or  the  excessively  careful  measurements 
of  the  base  line  of  a  trigonometrical  survey  by  standard 
bars  form  a  sufficient  instance  of  this  case. 

In  the  second  case,  where  p-  —  q,  we  multiply  or  divide 

y 
a  magnitude  until  we  get  what  is  equal  to  the  unit,  or  to 

some  magnitude  easily  comparable  with  it.  As  a  general 
rule  the  quantities  which  we  desire  to  measure  in 
physical  science  are  too  small  rather  than  too  great  for 
easy  determination,  and  the  problem  consists  in  multiply 
ing  them  without  introducing  error.  Thus  the  expansion 
of  a  metallic  bar  when  heated  from  o°  C  to  100°  may  be 
multiplied  by  a  train  of  levers  or  cog  wheels.  In  the 
common  thermometer  the  expansion  of  the  mercury  is 
rendered  very  apparent,  and  easily  measurable  by  the 
fineness  of  the  tube,  and  many  other  cases  might  be 
quoted.  There  are  some  phenomena,  on  the  contrary, 
which  are  too  great  or  rapid  to  come  within  the  easy 
range  of  our  senses,  and  our  task  is  then  the  opposite 
one  of  diminution.  Galileo  found  it  difficult  to  measure 
the  velocity  of  a  falling  body,  owing  to  the  very  consider 
able  velocity  acquired  in  a  single  second.  He  adopted 
the  elegant  device,  therefore,  of  lessening  the  rapidity 
by  letting  the  body  roll  down  an  inclined  plane,  which 
enables  us  to  reduce  the  accelerating  force  in  any  required 
ratio.  The  same  purpose  is  effected  in  the  well  known 
experiments  performed  on  Attwood's  machine,  and  the 
measurement  of  gravity  by  the  pendulum  really  depends 
on  the  same  principle  applied  in  a  far  more  advantageous 
manner.  Sir  Charles  Wheatstone  has  invented  a  beauti 
ful  method  of  galvanometry  for  strong  currents,  which 
consists  in  drawing  off  from  the  main  current  a  certain 
determinate  portion,  which  is  equated  by  the  galvano- 


334  THE   PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

meter  to  a  standard  current r.  In  short,  he  measures  not 
the  current  itself  but  a  known  fraction  of  it. 

In  many  electrical  and  other  experiments,  we  wish  to 
measure  the  movements  of  a  needle  or  other  body,  which 
are  not  only  very  slight  in  themselves,  but  the  manifes 
tations  of  exceedingly  small  forces.  We  cannot  even 
approach  a  delicately  balanced  needle  without  disturbing 
it.  Under  these  circumstances  the  only  mode  of  proceed 
ing  with  accuracy,  is  to  attach  a  very  small  mirror  to  the 
moving  body,  and  employ  a  ray  of  light  reflected  from 
the  mirror  as  an  index  of  its  movements.  The  ray  may 
be  considered  quite  incapable  of  affecting  the  body,  and 
yet  by  allowing  the  ray  to  pass  to  a  sufficient  distance, 
the  motions  of  the  mirror  may  be  increased  to  almost  any 
extent.  A  ray  of  light  is  in  fact  a  perfectly  weightless 
finger  or  index  of  indefinite  length,  with  the  additional 
advantage  that  the  angular  deviation  is  by  the  law  of 
reflection  double  that  of  the  mirror.  This  method,  was 
introduced  by  Gauss,  and  is  now  of  great  importance ; 
but  in  Wollaston's  reflecting  goniometer  a  ray  of  light 
had  previously  been  employed  as  an  index  finger.  Lavoi 
sier  and  Laplace  had  also  used  a  telescope  in  connection 
with  the  pyrometer. 

It  is  a  great  advantage  in  some  instruments  that  they 
can  be  readily  made  to  manifest  a  phenomenon  in  a  greater 
or  less  degree,  by  a  very  slight  change  in  the  construction. 
Thus  either  by  enlarging  the  bulb  or  contracting  the  tube 
of  the  thermometer,  we  can  make  it  give  more  conspicuous 
indications  of  change  of  temperature.  The  barometer,  on 
the  other  hand,  always  gives  the  variations  of  pressure 
on  one  scale.  The  torsion  balance  is  especially  remark 
able  for  the  extreme  delicacy  which  may  be  attained 
by  increasing  the  length  and  lightness  of  the  rod,  and  the 

r  De  la  Rive's  'Electricity/  vol.  ii.  pp.  897,  98. 


THE  EXACT  MEASUREMENT  OF  PHENOMENA.       335 

length  and  thinness  of  the  supporting  thread.  Forces  so 
minute  as  the  attraction  of  gravitation  between  two  balls, 
or  the  magnetic  and  diamagnetic  attraction  of  common 
liquids  and  gases,  may  thus  be  made  apparent,  and  even 
measured.  The  common  chemical  balance,  too,  is  capable 
theoretically  of  indefinite  sensibility8. 

The  third  mode  of  measurement,  which  may  be  called 
the  Method  of  Eepetition,  is  of  such  great  importance  and 
interest  that  we  must  consider  it  in  a  separate  section.  It 
consists  in  multiplying  both  magnitudes  to  be  compared 
until  some  multiple  of  the  first  is  found  to  coincide  very 
nearly  with  some  multiple  of  the  second.  If  the  multipli 
cation  can  be  effected  to  an  indefinite  extent,  without  the 
introduction  of  countervailing  errors,  the  accuracy  with 
which  the  required  ratio  can  be  determined  is  unlimited, 
and  we  thus  account  for  the  extraordinary  precision  with 
which  intervals  of  time  in  astronomy  are  compared  to 
gether. 

The  fourth  mode  of  measurement  in  which  we  equate 
submultiples  of  two  magnitudes  is  comparatively  seldom 
employed,  because  it  does  not  conduce  to  accuracy.  In 
the  photometer,  perhaps,  we  may  be  said  to  use  it ;  we 
compare  the  intensity  of  two  sources  of  light,  by  placing 
them  both  at  such  distances  from  a  given  surface,  that  the 
light  falling  on  the  surface  is  tolerable  to  the  eye,  and 
equally  intense  from  each  source.  Since  the  intensity  of 
rays  diminishes,  as  the  inverse  squares  of  the  distances, 
the  relative  intensities  of  the  luminous  bodies  are  propor 
tional  to  the  squares  of  their  distances.  The  equality  of 
intensity  of  two  rays  of  similarly  coloured  light,  may  be 
most  accurately  ascertained  in  the  mode  suggested  by 
Arago,  namely,  by  causing  the  rays  to  pass  in  opposite 
directions  through  two  nearly  flat  lenses  pressed  together. 

s  Watt's  'Dictionary  of  Chemistry/  art.  Balance,  vol.  i.  p.  487. 


33G  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

There  is  an  exact  equation  between  the  intensities  of  the 
beams  when  Newton's  rings  disappear,  the  ring  created 
by  one  ray  being  exactly  the  complement  of  that  created 
by  the  other1. 

The  Method  of  Repetition. 

The  ratio  of  two  quantities  can  be  determined  with 
unlimited  accuracy,  if  we  can  multiply  both  the  object 
of  measurement  and  the  standard  unit  without  error,  and 
then  observe  what  multiple  of  the  one  coincides  or  nearly 
coincides  with  some  multiple  of  the  other.  Although  per 
fect  coincidence  can  never  be  really  attained,  the  error 
thus  arising  may  be  indefinitely  reduced.  For  if  the 
equation  py  =  qx  be  uncertain  to  the  amount  e,  so 

1C          P 

that       py  =  qx±e,      then  we  have        p  =  q-±-}       and 

J          J 

as  we  are  supposed  to  be  able  to  make  y  as  great  as  we 
like  without  increasing  the  error  e,  it  follows  that  we 
can  approximate  as  closely  as  we  like  to  the  required 
ratio  x  +  y. 

This  method  of  repetition  is  naturally  employed  when 
ever  quantities  can  be  repeated,  or  repeat  themselves 
without  error  of  juxtaposition,  which  is  especially  the 
case  with  the  motions  of  the  earth  and  heavenly  bodies. 
In  determining  the  length  of  the  sidereal  day,  we  really 
determine  the  ratio  between  the  earth's  revolution  round 
the  sun,  and  its  rotation  on  its  own  axis.  We  might 
ascertain  the  ratio  by  observing  the  successive  passages 
of  a  star  across  the  zenith,  and  comparing  the  interval  by 
a  good  clock  with  that  between  two  passages  of  the  sun, 
the  difference  being  due  to  the  angular  movement  of  the 
earth  round  the  sun.  In  such  observations  w7e  should 
have  an  error  of  a  considerable  part  of  a  second  at  ?ach 

1  Humboldt's  'Cosmos/  (Bolin),  vol.  iii.  p.  129. 


THE  EXACT  MEASUREMENT  OF  PHENOMENA.      337 

observation,  in  addition  to  the  irregularities  of  the  clock. 
But  the  revolutions  of  the  earth  repeat  themselves  day 
after  day,  and  year  after  year,  without  the  slightest  in 
terval  between  the  end  of  one  period  and  the  beginning 
of  another.  The  operation  of  multiplication  is  perfectly 
performed  for  us  by  nature.  If,  then,  we  can  find  an  obser 
vation  of  the  passage  of  a  star  across  the  meridian  a  hun 
dred  years  ago.  that  is  of  the  interval  of  time  between 

*/  CD       * 

the  passage  of  the  sun  and  the  star,  the  instrumental 
errors  in  measuring  this  interval  by  a  clock  and  telescope 
may  be  greater  than  in  the  present  day,  but  will  be 
divided  by  about  36,524  days,  and  rendered  excessively 
small.  It  is  thus  that  astronomers  have  been  able  to 
ascertain  the  ratio  of  the  mean  solar  to  the  sideral  day 
to  the  8th  place  of  decimals  (i '002  7 3  791  to  i),  or  to  the 
hundred  millionth  part,  probably  the  most  accurate  result 
of  measurement  in  the  whole  range  of  science. 

The  antiquity  of  this  mode  of  comparison  is  almost  as 
great  as  that  of  astronomy  itself.  Hipparchus  made  the 
first  clear  •  application  of  it,  when  he  compared  his  own 
observations  with  those  of  Aristarchus,  made  145  years 
previously  u,  and  thus  ascertained  the  length  of  the  year. 
This  calculation  may  in  fact  be  regarded  as  the  earliest 
attempt  at  an  exact  determination  of  the  •  constants  of 
nature.  The  method  is  the  main  resource  of  astronomers  ; 
Tycho,  for  instance,  detected  the  slow  diminution  of  the 
obliquity  of  the  earth's  axis,  by  the  comparison  of  ob 
servations  at  long  intervals.  Living  astronomers  use  the 
method  as  much  as  earlier  ones ;  but  so  superior  in  ac 
curacy  are  all  observations  taken  during  the  last  hundred 
years  to  aU  previous  ones,  that  it  is  often  found  pre 
ferable  to  take  a  shorter  interval,  rather  than  incur  the 
risk  of  greater  instrumental  errors  in  the  earlier  observa 
tions. 

u  Montucla,  'Histoire  des  Mathematiques,'  vol.  i.  p.  258, 

Z 


338  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 


It  is  obvious  that  many  of  the  slower  changes  of  the 
heavenly  bodies  must  require  the  lapse  of  large  intervals 
of  time  to  render  their  amount  perceptible.  Hipparchus 
could  not  possibly  have  discovered  many  of  the  smaller 
inequalities  of  the  heavenly  motions,  because  there  were 
no  previous  observations  of  sufficient  age  or  exactness  to 
exhibit  them.  And  just  as  the  observations  of  Hipparchus 
formed  the  starting-point  for  subsequent  comparisons,  so 
a  large  part  of  the  labour  of  present  astronomers  is  di 
rected  to  recording  the  present  state  of  the  heavens  so 
exactly,  that  future  generations  of  astronomers  may  detect 
many  changes,  which  cannot  possibly  become  known  in 
the  present  age. 

The  principle  of  repetition  was  very  ingeniously  em 
ployed  in  an  instrument  first  proposed  by  Mayer  in  1767, 
and  carried  into  practice  in  the  Repeating  Circle  of  Borda  v. 
The  exact  measurement  of  angles  is  indispensable,  not 
only  in  astronomy  but  also  in  trigonometrical  surveys,  and 
the  highest  skill  in  the  mechanical  execution  of  the  gradu 
ated  circle  and  telescope  will  not  prevent  terminal  errors 
of  considerable  amount.  If  instead  of  one  telescope,  the 
circle  be  provided  with  two  similar  telescopes,  these  may 
be  alternately  directed  to  two  distant  points,  say  the 
marks  in  a  trigonometrical  survey,  so  that  the  circle  shall 
be  turned  through  any  multiple  of  the  angle  subtended 
by  those  marks,  before  the  amount  of  the  angular  revolu 
tion  is  read  off  upon  the  graduated  circle.  Theoretically 
speaking,  all  error  arising  from  -imperfect  graduation  might 
thus  be  indefinitely  reduced,  being  divided  by  the  number 
of  repetitions.  In  practice,  however,  the  advantage  of 
the  invention  is  not  found  to  be  great,  probably  because 
a  certain  error  is  introduced  at  each  observation  in  the 
changing  or  fixing  of  the  telescopes.  It  is  moreover  in- 

v  Young,  'Works,'  vol.  ii.  p.  546. 


THE  EXACT  MEASUREMENT  OF  PHENOMENA.      339 

applicable  to  moving  objects  like  the  heavenly  bodies,  so 
that  its  use  is  confined  to  important  trigonometrical 
surveys. 

The  pendulum  is  the  most  perfect  of  all  instruments, 
chiefly  because  it  naturally  admits  of  almost  indefinite 
repetition.  Since  the  force  of  gravity  never  ceases,  one 
swing  of  the  pendulum  is  no  sooner  ended  than  the  other 
is  begun,  so  that  the  juxtaposition  of  successive  units  is 
absolutely  perfect.  Provided  that  the  oscillations  be  equal, 
then  one  thousand  oscillations  will  occupy  exactly  one 
thousand  times  as  great  an  interval  of  time  as  one  oscil 
lation.  Not  only  is  the  subdivision  of  time  entirely  de 
pendent  on  this  fact,  but  in  the  accurate  measurement  of 
gravity,  and  many  important  determination  it  is  of 
the  greatest  service.  In  the  deepest  mine,  we  could  not 
observe  the  rapidity  of  fall  of  a  body  for  more  than  a 
quarter  of  a  minute,  and  the  measurement  of  its  velocity 
would  be  difficult,  and  subject  to  uncertain  errors  from 
resistance  of  air,  &c.  In  the  pendulum,  we  have  a  body 
which  can  be  kept  rising  and  falling  for  many  hours,  in 
a  medium  entirely  under  our  command  or  if  desirable  in 
a  vacuum.  Moreover,  the  comparative  force  of  gravity  at 
different  points,  at  the  top  and  bottom  of  a  mine  for 
instance,  can  be  determined  with  wonderful  precision,  by 
comparing  the  oscillations  of  two  exactly  similar  pendu 
lums,  with  the  aid  of  electric  clock  signals.  To  ascertain 
the  comparative  lengths  of  vibration  of  two  pendulums,  it 
is  only  requisite  to  swing  them  one  in  front  of  the  other, 
to  record  by  a  clock  the  moment  when  they  coincide  in 
swing,  so  that  one  hides  the  other,  and  then  count  the 
number  of  vibrations  until  they  again  come  to  similar 
coincidence.  If  one  pendulum  makes  m  vibrations  and 
the  other  n,  we  at  once  have  our  equation  pn  =  qm ; 
which  gives  the  length  of  vibration  of  either  pendulum  in 
terms  of  the  other.  This  method  of  coincidence,  embody- 

z  2 


340  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 


ing  the  principle  of  repetition  in  perfection,  was  employed 
with  wonderful  skill  by  Sir  George  Airy,  in  his  experi 
ments  on  the  Density  of  the  Earth  at  the  Harton  Colliery  ; 
the  pendulums  above  and  below  being  compared  with 
clocks,  which  again  were  compared  with  each  other  by 
electric  signals.  So  exceedingly  accurate  was  this  method 
of  observation,  as  carried  out  by  Sir  George  Airy,  that  he 
was  able  to  measure  a  total  difference  in  the  vibrations  at 
the  top  and  bottom  of  the  shaft,  amounting  to  only  2-24 
seconds  in  the  twenty-four  hours,  with  an  error  of  less 
than  one  hundredth  part  of  a  second,  or  one  part  in 
8,640,000  of  the  whole  day  x. 

The  principle  of  repetition  has  been  elegantly  applied 
in  observing  the  motion  of  waves  in  water.  If  the  canal 
in  which  the  experiments  are  made  be  short,  say  twenty 
feet  long,  the  waves  will  pass  through  it  so  rapidly  that 
an  observation  of  one  length,  as  practised  by  Walker,  will 
be  subject  to  much  terminal  error,  even  when  the  observer 
is  very  skilful.  But  it  is  a  result  of  the  undulatory  theory 
that  a  wave  is  quite  unaltered,  and  loses  no  time  by  com 
plete  reflection,  so  that  it  may  be  allowed  to  travel  back 
wards  and  forwards  in  the  same  canal,  and  its  motion,  say 
through  sixty  lengths,  or  1200  feet,  may  be  observed  with 
the  same  accuracy  as  in  a  canal  1200  feet  long,  with  the 
advantage  of  greater  uniformity  in  the  condition  of  the 
canal  and  water  y.  It  is  always  desirable,  if  possible,  to 
bring  an  experiment  into  a  small  compass,  so  as  to  be  well 
under  command,  and  yet  we  may  often  by  repetition 
enjoy  at  the  same  time  the  advantage  of  extensive  obser 
vation. 

One  reason  of  the  great  accuracy  of  weighing  with  a 
good  balance  is  the  fact,  that  weights  placed  in  the  same 

x  'Philosophical  Transactions,'  (1856)  vol.  146,  Part  i.  p.  297. 
y  Airy,  '  On  Tides  and  Waves,'  Encyclopaedia  Metropolitana,  p.  345. 
Scott  Russell,  '  British  Association  Report/  1837,  p.  432. 


THE  EXACT  MEASUREMENT  OF  PHENOMENA.      341 

scale  are  naturally  added  together  without  the  slightest 
error.  There  is  no  difficulty  in  the  precise  juxtaposition 
of  two  grammes,  but  the  juxtaposition  of  two  metre  mea 
sures  can  only  be  effected  with  tolerable  accuracy,  by  the 
use  of  microscopes  and  many  precautions.  Hence,  the 
extreme  trouble  and  cost  attaching  to  the  exact  measure 
ment  of  a  base  line  for  a  survey,  the  risk  of  error  entering 
at  every  juxtaposition  of  the  measuring  bars,  and  indefatig 
able  attention  to  all  the  requisite  precautions  being  neces 
sary  throughout  the  operation z. 

Measurements  by  Natural  Coincidence. 

In  certain  cases  a  peculiar  conjunction  of  circumstances 
enables  us  to  dispense  more  or  less  with  instrumental 
aids,  and  to  obtain  the  most  exact  numerical  results  in 
the  simplest  manner.  The  mere  fact,  for  instance,  that 
no  human  being  has  ever  seen  a  different  face  of  the  moon 
from  that  familiar  to  us,  conclusively  proves  that  the 
period  of  rotation  of  the  moon  on  its  own  axis  is  equal 
to  that  of  its  revolution  round  the  earth.  Not  only  have 
we  the  repetition  of  these  movements  during  1000  or 
2000  years  at  least,  but  we  have  observations  made  for 
us  at  very  remote  periods,  free  from  instrumental  error, 
no  instrument  being  needed.  We  learn  that  the  seventh 
satellite  of  Saturn  is  subject  to  a  similar  law,  because  its 
light  undergoes  a  variation  in  each  revolution,  owing  to 
the  existence  of  some  dark  tract  of  land  ;  now  this  failure 
of  light  always  occurs  while  it  is  in  the  same  position 
relative  to  Saturn,  clearly  proving  the  equality  of  the 
axial  and  revolutional  periods,  as  Huyghens  perceived a. 

z  Herschel's,  '  Familiar  Lectures  on  Scientific  Subjects/  p.  184. 
a  '  Hugenii  Cosmo theoros,'  pp.   117-18.    Laplace's  '  Systbme,'  trans 
lated,  vol.  i.  p.  67. 


312  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

A  like  peculiarity  in  the  motions  of  Jupiter's  fourth  satel 
lite  was  similarly  detected  by  Maraldi  in  1713. 

Remarkable  conjunctions  of  the  planets  may  sometimes 
allow  us  to  compare  their  periods  of  revolution,  through 
long  intervals  of  time,  with  great  accuracy.  Laplace  in 
explaining  the  long  inequality  in  the  motions  of  Jupiter 
and  Saturn,  was  much  assisted  by  a  conjunction  of  these 
planets,  observed  by  Ibyn  Jounis  at  Cairo,  towards  the 
close  of  the  eleventh  century.  Laplace  calculated  that 
such  a  conjunction  must  have  happened  on  the  3ist  of 
October,  A.  D.  1087  ;  and  the  discordance  between  the  dis 
tances  of  the  planets  as  recorded,  and  as  assigned  by 
theory,  was  less  than  one-fifth  of  the  apparent  diameter 
of  the  sun.  This  difference  being  less  than  the  probable 
error  of  the  early  record,  his  theory  was  confirmed  as  far 
as  facts  were  available1*. 

The  ancient  astronomers  often  shewed  the  highest  in 
genuity  in  turning  any  opportunities  of  measurement 
which  occurred  to  good  account.  Eratosthenes,  as  early 
as -2  50  B.C.,  happening  to  hear  that  the  sun  at  Syene,  in 
Upper  Egypt,  was  visible  at  the  summer  solstice  at  the 
bottom  of  a  well,  proving  that  it  was  in  the  zenith,  pro 
posed  to  determine  the  dimensions  of  the  earth,  by  mea 
suring  the  length  of  the  shadow  of  a  rod  at  Alexandria  on 
the  same  day  of  the  year.  He  thus  learnt  in  a  rude 
manner  the  difference  of  latitude  between  Alexandria  and 
Syene,  and  finding  it  to  be  about  one  fiftieth  part  of  the 
whole  circumference,  he  ascertained  the  dimensions  of  the 
earth  within  about  one  sixth  part  of  the  truth.  The  use 
of  wells  in  astronomical  observation  appears  to  have  been 
occasionally  practised  in  comparatively  recent  times,  as 
by  Flamsteed  in  1679°.  Hipparchus  employed  the  moon 
as  an  instrument  of  measurement  in  several  sagacious 

b  Grant's,  'History  of  Physical  Astronomy,'  p.  129. 
c  Baily's,  '  Account  of  Flamsteed,'  p.  lix. 


THE  EXACT  MEASUREMENT  OF  PHENOMENA.       343 

modes.  When  the  moon  is  exactly  half  full,  the  moon, 
sun,  and  earth,  are  at  the  angles  of  a  right-angled  triangle. 
He  proposed  therefore  at  such  a  time  to  measure  the 
moon's  elongation  from  the  sun,  which  would  give  him 
the  two  other  angles  of  the  triangle,  and  enable  him  to 
judge  of  the  comparative  distances  of  the  moon  and  sun 
from  the  earth.  His  result,  though  very  rude,  was  far 
more  accurate  than  any  notions  previously  entertained, 
and  enabled  him  to  form  some  estimate  of  the  comparative 
magnitudes  of  the  bodies.  Eclipses  of  the  moon  were  also 
very .  useful  in  ascertaining  the  longitudes  of  the  stars, 
which  were  invisible  when  the  sun  was  above  the  horizon. 
For  the  moon  when  eclipsed  must  be  180°  distant  from 
the  sun ;  hence  it  was  only  requisite  to  measure  the 
distance  of  a  fixed  star  in  longitude  from  the  eclipsed 
moon  to  obtain  with  ease  its  angular  distance  from  the 
sun. 

In  later  times  the  eclipses  of  Jupiter  have  usefully 
served  to  give  a  measure  of  an  angle  ;  for  at  the  middle 
moment  of  the  eclipse  the  satellite  must  be  exactly  in  the 
same  straight  line  with  the  planet  and  sun,  so  that  we 
can  learn  from  the  known  laws  of  movement  of  the 
satellite  the  longitude  of  Jupiter  as  seen  from  the  sun. 
If  at  the  same  time  we  measure  the  elongation  or  ap 
parent  angular  distance  of  Jupiter  from  the  sun,  as  seen 
from  the  earth,  we  have  all  the  angles  of  the  triangle 
between  Jupiter,  the  sun,  and  the  earth,  and  can  cal 
culate  the  comparative  magnitudes  of  the  sides  of  the 
triangle  by  simple  trigonometry. 

The  transits  of  Venus  over  the  sun's  face  are  other 
natural  events  which  seem  to  give  most  accurate  measure 
ments  of  the  sun's  parallax,  or  apparent  difference  of 
position  as  seen  from  distant  points  of  the  earth's  surface. 
The  sun  forms  a  kind  of  background  on  which  the  place 
of  the  planet  is  marked,  and  serves  as  a  measuring  instru- 


344  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

ment  free  from  all  the  errors  of  construction,  which  affect 
human  instruments.  The  rotation  of  the  earth,  too,  by 
variously  affecting  the  apparent  velocity  of  ingress  or 
egress  of  Venus,  as  seen  from  different  places,  discloses 
the  amount  of  the  parallax.  It  has  been  sufficiently 
shown  that  by  rightly  choosing  the  moments  of  obser 
vation,  the  planetary  bodies  may  often  be  made  to  reveal 
their  relative  distance,  to  measure  their  own  position,  to 
record  their  own  movements  with  a  high  degree  of  ac 
curacy.  With  the  improvement  of  astronomical  instru 
ments,  such  conjunctions  become  less  necessary  to  the 
progress  of  the  science,  but  it  will  always  remain  ad 
vantageous  to  choose  those  moments  for  observation 
when  instrumental  errors  enter  with  the  least  effect. 

In  other  sciences,  exact  quantitative  laws  can  occasion 
ally  be  obtained  without  instrumental  measurement,  as 
when  we  learn  the  exactly  equal  velocity  of  sounds  of 
different  pitch,  by  observing  that  a  peal  of  bells  or  a 
musical  performance  is  heard  harmoniously  at  any  dis 
tance  to  which  the  sound  penetrates ;  this  could  not  be 
the  case,  as  Newton  remarked,  if  one  sound  overtook 
the  other.  One  of  the  most  important  principles  of  the 
atomic  theory,  was  proved  by  implication,  before  the  use 
of  the  balance  was  introduced  into  chemistry.  Wenzel 
observed,  before  1777,  that  when  two  neutral  substances 
decompose  each  other,  the  resulting  salts  are  also  neutral. 
In  mixing  sodium  sulphate  and  barium  nitrate,  we 
obtain  insoluble  barium  sulphate  and  neutral  sodium 
nitrate.  This  result  could  not  follow  unless  the  nitric 
acid,  requisite  to  saturate  one  atom  of  sodium,  were 
exactly  equal  to  that  required  by  one  atom  of  barium, 
so  that  an  exchange  could  take  place  without  leaving 
either  acid  or  base  in  excess  d. 

A  very  important  principle  of  mechanics  may  also  be 

d  Daubeny,  '  Atomic  Theory/  p.  30. 


THE  EXACT  MEASUREMENT  OF  PHENOMENA.     345 

established  by  a  simple  acoustical  observation.  When 
a  rod  or  tongue  of  metal  fixed  at  one  end  is  set  in 
vibration,  the  pitch  of  the  sound  may  be  observed  to 
be  exactly  the  same,  whether  the  vibrations  be  small  or 
great ;  hence  the  oscillations  are  isochronous,  or  equally 
rapid,  independently  of  their  magnitude.  On  the  ground 
of  theory,  it  can  be  shown  that  such  a  result  only 
happens  when  the  flexure  is  proportional  to  the  deflecting 
force.  Thus  the  simple  observation  that  the  pitch  of 
the  sound  of  a  harmonium,  for  instance,  does  not  change 
with  its  loudness,  establishes  an  exact  law  of  nature  °. 

A  closely  similar  instance  is  found  in  the  proof  that  the 
intensity  of  light  or  heat  rays  varies  inversely  as  the 
square  of  the  distance  increases.  For  the  apparent  mag 
nitude  certainly  varies  according  to  this  law;  hence,  if  the 
intensity  of  light  varied  according  to  any  other  law,  the 
brightness  of  an  object  would  be  different  at  different 
distances,  which  is  not  observed  to  be  the  case.  Mellorii 
applied  the  same  kind  of  reasoning,  in  a  somewhat  dif 
ferent  form,  to  the  radiation  of  heat-rays  f. 


Modes  of  Indirect  Measurement. 

Some  of  the  most  conspicuously  beautiful  experiments 
in  the  whole  range  of  science,  have  been  devised  for  the 
purpose  of  indirectly  measuring  quantities,  which  in  their 
extreme  greatness  or  smalmess  surpass  the  powers  of 
sense.  All  that  we  need  to  do,  is  to  discover  some 
other  conveniently  measurable  phenomenon,  which  is  re 
lated  in  a  known  ratio  or  according  to  a  known  law, 
however  complicated,  with  that  to  be  measured.  Having 

e  Jamin,  '  Cours  de  Physique,'  vol.  i.  p.  152. 

f  Balfour  Stewart's,  'Elementary  Treatise  on  Heat/  ist  edit.  pp.  164, 

165- 


346  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

once  obtained  experimental  data,  there  is  no  further 
difficulty  beyond  that  of  arithmetic  or  algebraic  calcu 
lation. 

Gold  is  reduced  by  the  gold-beater  to  leaves  so  thin, 
that  the  most  powerful  microscope  would  not  detect  any 
measurable  thickness.  If  we  laid  several  hundred  leaves 
upon  each  other  to  multiply  the  thickness,  we  should 
still  have  no  more  than  Yiroth  of  an  inch  at  the  most  to 
measure,  and  the  errors  arising  in  the  superposition  and 
measurement  would  be  considerable.  But  we  can  readily 
obtain  an  exact  result  through  the  connected  amount  of 
weight.  Faraday  weighed  2000  leaves  of  gold,  each 
3§  inch  square,  and  found  them  equal  to  384  grains. 
From  the  known  specific  gravity  of  gold,  it  was  easy  to 
calculate  that  the  average  thickness  of  the  leaves  was 

,821ooo  Of  an  incn  g- 

We  must  ascribe  to  Newton  the  honour  of  leading  the 
way  in  methods  of  minute  measurement.  He  did  not 
call  waves  of  light  by  their  right  name,  and  did  not 
understand  their  nature  ;  yet  he  measured  "their  length, 
though  it  did  not  exceed  the  2,ooo,oooth  part  of  a  metre 
or  the  one  fifty  thousandth,  part  of  an  inch.  He  pressed 
together  two  lenses  of  very  large  but  known  radii.  It 
was  not  difficult  to  calculate  the  interval  between  the 
lenses  at  any  point,  by  measuring  the  distance  from  the 
central  point  of  contact.  Now,  with  homogeneous  rays  the 
successive  rings  of  light  and  darkness  mark  the  points  at 
which  the  interval  between  the  lenses  is  equal  to  one 
half,  or  any  multiple  of  half  a  vibration  of  the  light,  so 
that  the  length  of  the  vibration  became  known.  In  a 
similar  manner  many  phenomena  of  interference  of  rays 
of  light  admit  of  the  measurement  of  the  wave  lengths, 
The  fringes  of  interference  arise  from  rays  of  light  which 
cross  each  other  at  a  small  angle,  and  an  excessively 

g  Faraday,  'Chemical  Researches,'  p.  393. 


THE  EXACT  MEASUREMENT  OF  PHENOMENA.      347 

minute  difference  in  the  lengths  of  the  waves  makes  a 
very  perceptible  difference  in  the  position  of  the  point 
at  which  two  rays  will  interfere  and  produce  darkness. 

M.  Fizeau  has  recently  employed  Newton's  rings  in  an 
inverse  manner,  to  measure  small  amounts  of  motion.  By 
merely  counting  the  number  of  rings  of  sodium  mono 
chromatic  light  passing  a  certain  point  where  two  glass 
plates  are  in  close  proximity,  he  is  able  to  ascertain  with 
the  greatest  accuracy  and  ease  the  change  of  distance 
between  these  glasses,  produced,  for  instance,  by  the  ex 
pansion  of  a  metallic  bar,  connected  with  one  of  the  glass 
plates11. 

Nothing  excites  more  admiration  than  the  mode  in 
which  scientific  observers  can  occasionally  measure  quan 
tities,  which  seem  bevond  the  bounds  of  human  obser- 

tj 

vation.  We  know  the  average  depth  of  the  Pacific 
Ocean  to  be  14,190  feet,  not  by  actual  sounding,  which 
would  be  impracticable  in  sufficient  detail,  but  by  noticing 
the  rate  of  transmission  of  earthquake  waves  from  the 
South  American  to  the  opposite  coasts,  the  rate  of  move 
ment  being  connected  by  theory  with  tbe  depth  of  the 
water1.  In.  the  same  way  the  average  depth  of  the 
Atlantic  Ocean  is  inferred  to  be  no  less  than  22,157  feet, 
from  the  velocity  of  the  ordinary  tidal  waves.  A  tidal 
wave  again  gives  beautiful  evidence  of  an  effect  of  the 
law  of  gravity,  which  we  could  never  in  any  other  way 
detect.  Newton  estimated  that  the  moon's  force  in  mov 
ing:  the  ocean  is  onlv  —  —part  of  the  whole  force  of 

2,871, 400  L 

gravity,  which  even  the  pendulum,  used  with  the  utmost 
skill,  would  fail  to  render  apparent.  Yet  the  immense 
extent  of  the  ocean  allows  the  accumulation  of  the  effect 
into  a  very  palpable  amount ;  and  from  the  comparative 

h  'Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society/  3oth  November,  1866. 
i  Herschel,  '  Physical  Geography/  §  40. 


348  THE   PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

heights  of  the  lunar  and  solar  tides,  Newton  roughly 
estimated  the  comparative  forces  of  the  moon's  and  sun's 
gravity  at  the  earth k. 

A  few  years  ago  it  might  have  seemed  impossible  that 
we  should  ever  measure  the  velocity  with  which  a  star 
approaches  or  recedes  from  the  earth,  since  the  apparent 
position  of  the  star  is  thereby  unaltered.  But  the  spec 
troscope  now  enables  us  to  detect  and  even  measure  such 
motion  with  considerable  accuracy,  by  the  alteration  which 
it  causes  in  the  apparent  rapidity  of  vibration,  and  conse 
quently  in  the  refrangibility  of  rays  of  light  of  definite 
colour.  And  while  our  estimates  of  the  lateral  move 
ments  of  stars  depend  upon  our  very  uncertain  know 
ledge  of  their  distance,  the  spectroscope  gives  the  motion 
in  another  direction  in  absolute  quantity,  irrespective  of 
all  other  quantities  known  or  unknown,  excepting  the 
motion  of  the  earth  itself1. 

The  rapidity  of  vibration  for  each  musical  tone,  hav 
ing  been  accurately  determined  by  comparison  with  the 
Syren  (p.  12),  we  can  use  sounds  as  indirect  indications  of 
rapid  vibrations.  It  is  now  known  that  the  contraction  of 
a  muscle  arises  from  the  periodical  contractions  of  each 
separate  fibre,  and  from  a  faint  sound  or  susurrus  which 
accompanies  the  action  of  a  muscle,  it  is  inferred  that 

each  contraction  lasts  for  about  — "—  of  a  second.     Minute 

300 

quantities  of  radiant  heat  are  now  always  measured  indi 
rectly  by  the  electricity  which  they  produce  when  falling 
upon  a  thermopile.  The  extreme  delicacy  of  the  method 
seems  to  be  due  to  the  power  of  multiplication  at  several 
points  in  the  apparatus.  The  number  of  elements  or  junc 
tions  of  different  rnetals  in  the  thermopile  can  be  increased 

'Principia,'  bk.  iii.  Prop.  37,  'Corollaries,'  2  and  3.     Motte's  trans 
lation,  vol.  ii.  p.  310. 

1  Roscoe's,  '  Spectrum,  Analysis,'  ist  ed.  p.  296. 


THE  EXACT  MEASUREMENT  OF  PHENOMENA.      349 

so  that  the  tension  of  the  electric  current  derived  from 
the  same  intensity  of  radiation  is  multiplied  ;  the  effect  of 
the  current  upon  the  magnetic  needle  can  be  multiplied 
within  certain  bounds,  by  passing  the  current  many  times 
round  it  in  a  coil ;  the  excursions  of  the  needle  can  be 
increased  by  rendering  it  astatic  and  increasing  the  deli 
cacy  of  its  suspension  ;  lastly,  the  angular  divergence  can 
be  observed,  with  any  required  accuracy,  by  the  use  of  an 
attached  mirror  and  distant  scale  viewed  through  a  tele 
scope  (p.  234).  Such  is  the  delicacy  of  this  method  of 
measuring  heat,  that  Dr.  Joule  succeeded  in  making  a 

thermopile  which  would  indicate  a  difference  of  -     -  part 

8800 

of  a  degree  centigrade  m. 

A  striking  case  of  indirect  measurement  is  furnished  by 
the  revolving  mirror  of  Wheatstone  and  Foucault,  whereby 
a  minute  interval  of  time  is  estimated  in  the  form  of  an 
angular  deviation.  Wheatstone  viewed  an  electric  spark 
in  a  mirror  rotating  so  rapidly,  that  if  the  duration  of  the 

spark  had  been  more  than  -        -  of  a  second,  the  point  of 

72,000 

light  would  have  appeared  elongated  to  an  angular  extent 
of  one-half  degree.  In  the  spark,  as  drawn  directly  from  a 
Leyden  jar,  no  elongation  was  apparent,  so  that  the  dura 
tion  of  the  spark  was  immeasurably  small ;  but  when  the 
discharge  took  place  through  a  bad  conductor,  the  elonga 
tion  of  the  spark  denoted  a  sensible  duration11.  In  the 
hands  of  Foucault  the  rotating  mirror  gave  a  measure 
of  the  time  occupied  by  light  in  passing  through  a  few 
metres  of  space. 

Comparative  Use  of  Measuring  Instruments. 
In  almost  every  case  a  measuring  instrument  serves, 

m  'Philosophical  Transactions'  (1859),  v°l-  cxlix.  p.  94. 
n  Watts'  '  Dictionary  of  Chemistry/  vol.  ii.  p.  393. 


350  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

and  should  serve  only  as  a  means  of  comparison  between 
two  or  more  magnitudes.  As  a  general  rule,  we  should 
not  even  attempt  to  make  the  divisions  of  the  measuring 
scale  exact  multiples  or  submultiples  of  the  unit,  but, 
regarding  them  as  arbitrary  marks,  should  determine  their 
values  by  comparison  with  the  standard  itself.  Thus  the 
perpendicular  wires  in  the  field  of  a  transit  telescope,  are 
fixed  at  nearly  equal  but  arbitrary  distances,  and  those 
distances  are  afterwards  determined,  as  first  suggested  by 
Malvasia,  by  watching  the  passage  of  star  after  star  across 
them,  and  noting  the  intervals  of  time  by  the  clock. 
Owing  to  the  perfectly  regular  motion  of  the  earth,  these 
time  intervals  give  an  exact  determination  of  the  angular 
intervals.  In  the  same  way,  the  angular  value  of  each 
turn  of  the  screw  micrometer  attached  to  a  telescope,  can 
be  easily  and  accurately  ascertained. 

When  a  thermopile  is  used  to  observe  radiant  heat,  it 
would  be  almost  impossible  to  calculate  on  a  priori 
grounds  what  is  the  value  of  each  division  of  the  galvano 
meter  circle,  and  still  more  difficult  to  construct  a  galva 
nometer,  so  that  each  division  should  have  a  given  value. 
But  this  is  quite  unnecessary,  because  by  placing  the  ther 
mopile  before  a  body  of  known  dimensions,  at  a  known 
distance,  with  a  known  temperature,  and  radiating  power, 
we  measure  a  known  amount  of  radiant  heat,  and  in 
versely  measure  the  value  of  the  indications  of  the  ther 
mopile.  In  a  similar  way  Mr.  Joule  ascertained  the  actual 
temperature  produced  by  the  compression  of  bars  of  metal. 
For  having  inserted  a  simple  thermopile  composed  of  a 
single  junction  of  copper  and  iron  wire,  and  noted  the 
deflections  of  the  galvanometer,  he  had  only  to  dip  the 
bars  into  water  of  different  temperatures,  until  he  pro 
duced  a  like  deflection,  in  order  to  ascertain  the  temperature 
developed  by  pressure0. 

0  'Philosophical  Transactions'  (1859),  vol.  cxlix.  p.  119,  &<?. 


THE  EXACT  MEASUREMENT  OF  PHENOMENA.      351 

In  many  instances  we  are  indeed  obliged  to  accept  a 
very  carefully  constructed  instrument  as  a  standard,  as  in 
the  case  of  a  standard  barometer.  But  it  is  then  best  to 
treat  all  inferior  instruments  comparatively  only,  and 
determine  the  values  of  their  scales  by  comparison  with 
the  assumed  standard. 

Systematic  Performance  of  Measurements. 

When  a  large  number  of  accurate  measurements  have 
to  be  effected,  it  is  usually  desirable  to  make  a  certain 
number  of  determinations  with  scrupulous  care,  and  after 
wards  use  them  as  points  of  reference  for  the  remaining 
determinations.  In  the  trigonometrical  survey  of  a  coun 
try,  the  principal  triangulation  fixes  the  relative  positions 
and  distances  of  a  few  points  with  rigid  accuracy.  A 
minor  triangulation  refers  every  prominent  hill  or  village 
to  one  of  the  principal  points,  and  then  the  details  are 
filled  in  by  reference  to  the  secondary  points.  The  survey 
of  the  heavens  is  effected  in  a  like  manner.  The  ancient 
astronomers  compared  the  right  ascensions  of  a  few  prin 
cipal  stars  with  the  moon,  and  thus  ascertained  their  posi 
tions  with  regard  to  the  sun ;  the  minor  stars  were  after 
wards  referred  to  the  principal  stars.  Tycho  followed 
the  same  method,  except  that  he  used  the  more  slowly 
moving  planet  Venus  instead  of  the  moon.  Flamsteed 
was  in  the  habit  of  using  about  seven  stars,  favourably 
situated  at  points  all  round  the  heavens.  The  distances 
of  the  other  stars  from  these  standard  points,  were  deter 
mined  in  his  early  observations  by  the  use  of  the  quadrant  P. 
Even  since  the  introduction  of  the  transit  telescope  and 
mural  circle,  tables  of  standard  stars  are  formed  at 
Greenwich,  the  positions  being  determined  with  every 

P  Baily's  'Account  of  Flamsteed/  pp.  378-380. 


352  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

possible  accuracy,  so  that  they  can  be  employed  for  pur 
poses  of  reference  by  all  astronomers. 

In  ascertaining  the  specific  gravities  of  substances,  all 
gases  are  referred  to  atmospheric  air  at  a  given  tempera 
ture  and  pressure ;  all  liquids  and  solids  are  referred  to 
water.  We  require  to  compare  the  densities  of  water 
and  air  with  great  care,  and  the  comparative  densities  of 
any  two  substances  whatever  can  then  be  with  ease 
ascertained. 

In  comparing  a  very  great  with  a  very  small  magni 
tude,  it  is  usually  desirable  to  break  up  the  process  into 
several  steps,  using  intermediate  terms  of  comparison. 
We  should  never  think  of  measuring  the  distance  from 
London  to  Edinburgh  by  laying  down  measuring  rods 
throughout  the  whole  distance.  A  base  of  several  miles 
in  length  is  selected  on  level  ground,  and  compared  on 
the  one  hand  with  the  standard  yard,  and  on  the  other 
with  the  distance  of  London  and  Edinburgh,  or  any  other 
two  points,  by  trigonometrical  survey.  It  would  be  ex 
ceedingly  difficult  to  compare  the  light  of  a  star  with 
that  of  the  sun,  which  would  be  about  thirty  thousand 
million  times  greater;  but  Sir  J.  Herscheli  effected  the 
comparison  by  using  the  full  moon  as  an  intermediate 
unit.  Wollaston  ascertained  that  the  sun  gave  801,072 
times  as  much  light  as  the  full  moon,  and  Herschel 
determined  that  the  light  of  the  latter  exceeded  that  of 
a  Centauri  27,408  times,  so  that  we  find  the  ratio  be 
tween  the  light  of  the  sun  and  star  to  be  that  of  about 
22,000,000,000  to  i. 

The  Pendulum. 

By  far  the  most  perfect  and  beautiful  of  all  instru 
ments  of  measurement  is  the  pendulum.  Consisting 

<i  Herschel's  'Astronomy/  §  817,  4th.  ed.  p.  553. 


THE  EXACT  MEASUREMENT  OF  PHENOMENA.      353 

merely  of  a  heavy  body  suspended  freely  at  an  invari 
able  distance  from  a  fixed  point,  it  is  the  most  simple 
in  construction ;  and  yet  all  the  highest  problems  of  phy 
sical  measurement  depend  upon  its  careful  use.  Its 
excessive  value  arises  from  two  circumstances,  which 
render  it  at  once  most  accurate  and  indispensable. 

(1)  The  method  of  repetition  is  eminently  applicable 
to  it,  as  already  described  (p.  339.) 

(2)  Unlike  any  other  instrument,  it  connects  together 
three  different   variable  quantities,  those  of  space,  time, 
and  force. 

In  most  works  on  natural  philosophy  it  is  shown,  that 
when  the  oscillations  of  the  pendulum  are  infinitely  small, 
the  square  of  the  time  occupied  by  an  oscillation  is  directly 
proportional  to  the  length  of  the  pendulum,  and  indirectly 
proportional  to  the  force  affecting  it,  of  whatever  kind. 
The  whole  theory  of  the  pendulum  is  contained  in  the 
formula,  first  given  by  Huyghens  in  his  Horologium  Oscil- 
latorium, 

time    of  OScillation=  3-14159.    .     x         /  length  of  pendulum 

V  force. 

The  quantity  3-14159  is  the  constant  ratio  of  the  circum 
ference  and  radius  of  a  circle,  and  is  of  course  known  with 
accuracy.  Hence,  any  two  of  the  three  quantities  con 
cerned  being  given,  the  third  may  be  found ;  or  any  two 
being  maintained  invariable,  the  third  will  be  invariable. 
Thus  a  pendulum  of  invariable  length  suspended  at  the 
same  place,  where  the  force  of  gravity  may  be  considered 
uniform,  furnishes  a  theoretically  perfect  measure  of  time. 
The  same  invariable  pendulum  being  made  to  vibrate  at 
different  points  of  the  earth's  surface,  and  the  time  of 
vibration  being  astronomically  determined,  the  force  of 
gravity  becomes  accurately  known.  Finally,  with  a  known 
force  of  gravity,  and  time  of  vibration  ascertained  by  refer 
ence  to  the  stars,  the  length  is  determinate. 

A  a 


354  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

In  the  first  use  all  astronomical  observations  depend 
upon  it.  In  the  second  employment  it  has  been  almost 
equally  indispensable.  The  primary  principle  that  gravity 
is  equal  in  all  matter  was  proved  by  Newton's  and  Gauss' 
pendulum  experiments.  The  torsion  pendulum  of  Michell, 
Cavendish,  and  Baily,  depending  upon  exactly  the  same 
principles  as  the  ordinary  pendulum,  gave  the  density  of 
the  earth,  one  of  the  foremost  natural  constants.  Kater 
arid  Sabine,  by  pendulum  observations  in  different  parts 
of  the  earth,  ascertained  the  variation  of  gravity,  whence 
comes  a  determination  of  the  earth's  ellipticity.  The  laws 
of  electric  and  magnetic  attraction  have  also  been  deter 
mined  by  the  method  of  vibrations,  which  is  in  constant 
use  in  the  measurement  of  the  horizontal  force  of  terres 
trial  magnetism. 

We  must  not  confuse  with  the  ordinary  use  of  the 
pendulum  its  application  by  Newton,  to  show  the  absence 
of  internal  friction  against  space1',  or  to  ascertain  the  laws 
of  motion  and  elasticity8.  In  such  cases  the  extent  of 
vibration  is  the  quantity  measured,  and  the  principles  of 
the  instrument  are  different. 

Attainable  Accuracy  of  Measurement. 

It  is  a  matter  of  some  interest  to  compare  the  degrees 
of  accuracy,  which  can  be  attained  in  the  measurement  of 
different  kinds  of  magnitude.  Few  measurements  of  any 
kind  are  exact  to  more  than  six  significant  figures*,  but  it 
is  seldom  that  such  a  point  of  accuracy  can  be  hoped  for. 
Time  is  the  magnitude  which  seems  to  be  capable  of  the 
most  exact  discrimination,  owing  to  the  properties  of  the 

r  '  Principia,'  bk.  ii.  Sect.  6.  Prop.  31.     Motte's  Translation,  vol.  ii 
p.  107. 

p  Ibid.  bk.  i.  Law  iii.  Corollary  6.     Motte's  Translation,  vol.  i.  p.  33. 
4  Thomson  and  Tail's  'Natural  Philosophy/  vol.  i.  p.  333. 


THE  EXACT  MEASUREMENT  OF  PHENOMENA.      355 

pendulum,  and  the  principle  of  repetition  already  described 
(PP-  339:  353)-  As  regards  short  intervals  of  time,  it  has 
already  been  stated  that  Sir  George  Airy  was  able  to 
estimate  a  difference  of  2^  seconds  per  day,  between  two 
pendulums  with  an  uncertainty  of  less  than  *oi  of  a  second, 
or  one  part  in  8,640,000,  an  exactness,  as  he  truly  remarks, 
'  almost  beyond  conception11'.  The  ratio  between  the  mean 
solar  and  the  sidereal  day,  too,  is  known  to  about  one  part 
in  one  hundred  millions,  or  to  the  eighth  place  of  decimals 

(P-  337)- 

Determinations  of  weight  seem  to  come  next  in  exact 
ness,  owing  to  the  fact  that  repetition  without  error  is 
applicable  to  them  (p.  340).  An  ordinary  good  balance 
should  show  about  one  part  in  500,000  of  the  loadx.  The 

finest  balance  employed  by  M.  Stas,  turned  with  -  -  of  a 

33 

milligramne,  when  loaded  with  25  grammes  in  each  pan, 
that  is,  with  one  part  in  825,000  of  the  loady.  But  balances 
have  certainly  been  constructed  to  show  one  part  in  a 
million z,  and  Eamsden  is  commonly  said  to  have  con 
structed  a  balance  for  the  Boyal  Society,  to  indicate  one 
part  in  seven  millions,  though  this  is  hardly  credible. 
Professor  Clerk  Maxwell  takes  it  for  granted  that  one 
part  in  five  millions  can  be  detected,  but  we  ought  to 
discriminate  between  what  a  balance  can  do  when  first 
constructed,  and  when  in  continuous  use. 

Determinations  of  lengths,  unless  performed  with  extra 
ordinary  care,  are  open  to  much  error  in  the  junction  of 
the  measuring  bars.  Even  in  measuring  the  base  line  of 
a  trigonometrical  survey,  the  accuracy  generally  attained 
is  only  that  of  about  one  part  in  60,000,  or  an  inch  in  the 

u  'Philosophical  Transactions/  (1856),  vol.  cxlvi  pp.  330-1. 
x  Thomson  and  Tait,  'Natural  Philosophy/  vol.  i.  p.  333. 
y  'First  Annual  Report  of  the  Mint/  p.  106. 
z  Jevons,  in  Watts'  '  Dictionary  of  Chemistry/  vol.  i.  p.  483. 

A  a  2 


356  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

milea ;  but  it  is  said  that  in  four  measurements  of  a 
base  line  carried  out  very  recently  at  Cape  Comorin,  the 
greatest  error  was  0*077  inch  in  i'68  mile,  or  one  part  in 
1,382,400,  an  almost  incredible  degree  of  accuracy b..  Sir  J. 
Whitworth  has  shown  that  touch  is  even  a  more  delicate 
mode  of  measuring  lengths  than  sight,  and  by  means  of  a 
splendidly  executed  screw,  and  a  small  cube  of  iron  placed 
between  two  flat-ended  iron  bars,  so  as  to  be  suspended 
when  touching  them,  he  can  detect  a  change  of  dimension 
in  a  bar,  amounting  to  no  more  than  one-millionth  of  an 
inchc. 

a  Thomson  and  Tait,  '  Natural  Philosophy,'  vol.  i.  p.  333. 
b  'Athenaeum/  February  28,  1870,  p.  295. 

c  British  Association,  Glasgow,   1856.     'Address  of  the  President  of 
the  Mechanical  Section.' 


CHAPTER    XIV. 


UNITS    AND    STANDARDS   OF   MEASUREMENT. 

INSTRUMENTS  of  measurement  are,  as  we  have  seen, 
only  means  of  comparison  between  one  magnitude  and 
another,  and  as  a  general  rule  we  must  assume  some 
one  arbitrary  magnitude,  in  terms  of  which  all  results 
of  measurement  are  to  be  expressed.  Mere  ratios  be 
tween  any  series  of  objects  will  never  tell  us  their 
absolute  magnitudes ;  we  must  have  at  least  one  ratio 
for  each,  and  we  must  have  one  absolute  quantity.  The 
number  of  ratios  n  are  expressible  in  n  equations,  which 
will  contain  at  least  n  +  i  quantities,  so  that  if  we 
employ  them  to  make  known  n  magnitudes,  we  must 
have  one  magnitude  known.  Hence,  whether  we  are 
measuring  time,  space,  density,  weight,  mass,  energy,  or 
any  other  physical  quantity,  we  must  refer  to  some  con 
crete  standard,  some  actual  object,  which  if  once  lost  and 
irrecoverable,  all  our  measures  lose  their  absolute  mean 
ing.  This  concrete  standard  is  in  all,  except  two,  cases 
absolutely  arbitrary  in  point  of  theory,  and  its  selection 
a  question  of  practical  convenience. 

Of  the  two  cases  in  which  a  natural  standard  unit  is 
ready  made  for  us,  one  case  is  that  of  number  itself. 
Abstract  number  needs  no  special  unit ;  for  any  object 
by  existing  or  being  thought  of  as  separate  from  other 
objects  (p.  176),  furnishes  us  with  a  unit,  and  is  the  only 
standard  required. 


358  '  THE  PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

Angular  magnitude  is  the  second  case  in  which  we 
have  a  natural  and  almost  necessary  unit  of  reference, 
namely,  the  whole  revolution  or  perigon,  as  it  has  been 
called  by  Mr.  Sandemana. 

It  is  a  necessary  result  of  the  uniform  properties  of 
space,  that  all  complete  revolutions  are  equal  to  each 
other,  so  that  we  need  not  select  any  one,  and  can  always 
refer  anew  to  space  itself.  Whether  we  take  the  whole 
perigon,  its  half,  or  its  quarter,  is  really  immaterial  ; 
Euclid  took  the  right  angle,  because  the  Greek  geome 
ters  had  never  generalized  their  notions  of  angular 
magnitude  sufficiently  to  conceive  clearly  angles  of  all 
magnitude,  or  of  unlimited  quantity  of  revolution.  But 
Euclid  defines  a  right  angle  as  half  that  made  by  a  line 
with  its  own  continuation,  not  called  by  him  an  angle,  and 
which  is  of  course  equal  to  half  a  revolution.  In  mathe 
matical  analysis,  again,  a  different  fraction  of  the  perigon 
is  taken,  namely,  such  a  fraction  that  the  arc  or  portion 
of  the  circumference  included  within  it  is  equal  to  the 
radius  of  the  circle-.  This  angle,  called  by  De  Morgan  the 
arcual  unit,  is  equal  to  about  57°,  17',  44-"'8,  or  decimally 
57°'2957795i3 ,  and  is  such  that  the  half  revolu 
tion  contains  3*141 59265  ....  such  unitsb.  Though  this 
standard  angle  is  naturally  employed  in  mathematical 
analysis,  and  any  other  unit  would  introduce  needless 
complexity,  we  must  not  look  upon  it  as  a  distinct  unit, 
since  its  amount  is  connected  with  that  of  the  half  peri 
gon,  by  a  natural  constant  3*14159 usually  signified 

by  the  letter  TT. 

When  we  pass  to  other  species  of  quantity,  the  choice 
of  unit  is  found  to  be  entirely  arbitrary.  There  is  abso- 

a  '  Pelicotetics,  or  the  Science  of  Quantity  ;  an  Elementary  Treatise  on 
Algebra,  and  its  groundwork  Arithmetic.'  By  Archibald  Sandeman,  M.A. 
Cambridge,  (Deighton,  Bell,  and  Co.)  1868,  p.  304. 

b  De  Morgan's  '  Trigonometry  and  Double  Algebra,'  p.  5. 


UNITS  AND  STANDARDS  OF  MEASUREMENT.       359 

lutely  no  mode  of  defining  a  length,  but  by  selecting  some 
physical  object  exhibiting  that  length  between  certain 
obvious  points — as,  for  instance,  the  extremities  of  a  bar, 
or  marks  made  upon  its  surface. 

Standard  Unit  of  Time. 

Time  is  the  great  independent  variable  of  all  change, 
that  which  itself  flows  on  uninterruptedly,  and  brings  the 
variety  which  we  call  life  and  motion.  When  we  reflect 
upon  its  intimate  nature,  Time,  like  every  other  element  of 
existence,  proves  to  be  an  inscrutable  mystery.  We  can 
only  say  with  St.  Augustin,  to  one  who  asks  us  what  is 
time,  '  I  know  when  you  do  not  ask  me/  The  mind  of 
man  will  ask  what  can  never  be  answered,  but  one  result 
of  a  true  and  rigorous  logical  philosophy  must  be  to 
convince  us,  that  scientific  explanation  can  only  take  place 
between  phenomena  which  have  something  in  common, 
and  that  when  we  get  down  to  primary  notions,  like  those 
of  time  and  space,  the  mind  must  meet  a  point  of  mystery 
beyond  which  it  cannot  penetrate.  A  definition  of  time 
must  not  be  looked  for;  if  we  say  with  Hobbesc,  that  it 
is  'the  phantasm  of  before  and  after  in  motion,'  or  with 
Aristotle  that  it  is  'the  number  of  motion  according  to 
former  and  latter  ; '  we  obviously  gain  nothing,  because 
the  notion  of  time  is  involved  in  the  expressions  before 
and  after,  former  and  latter.  Time  is  undoubtedly  one 
of  those  primary  notions  which  can  only  be  defined  physi 
cally,  or  by  observation  of  phenomena  which  proceed  in 
time. 

If  we  have  not  advanced  a  step  beyond  Augustin's  acute 
reflections  on  this  subject01,   it  is  curious  to  observe  the 

c  '  English  Works  of  Thos.  Hobbes,'  Edit,  by  Molesworth,  vol.  i.  p.  95. 
d  '  Confessions,'  bk.  xi.  chapters  20-28. 


360  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

wonderful  advances  which  have  been  made  in  the  practical 
measurement  of  its  efflux.  The  rude  sun-dial  or  the 
rising  of  a  conspicuous  star,  gave  points  of  reference,  while 
the  flow  of  water  from  the  clepsydra,  the  burning  of  a 
candle,  or,  in  the  monastic  ages,  even  the  continuous 
equable  chanting  of  psalms,  gave  the  means  of  roughly 
subdividing  periods,  and  marking  the  hours  of  the  day  and 
night6.  The  sun  and  stars  still  furnish  the  standard  of 
time,  but  means  of  accurate  subdivision  have  become 
requisite,  and  this  has  been  furnished  by  the  pendulum 
and  the  chronoscope.  By  the  pendulum  we  can  accurately 
divide  the  day  into  seconds  of  time.  By  the  chronograph 
we  can  subdivide  the  second  into  a  hundred,  a  thousand, 
or  even  a  million  parts.  Wheatstone  measured  the  dura 
tion  of  an  electric  spark,  and  found  it  to  be  no  more  than 

— -^  part  of  a  second,  while  more  recently  Captain  Noble 

has  been  able  to  appreciate  intervals  of  time,  not  exceed 
ing  the  millionth  part  of  a  second. 

When  we  come  to  inquire  precisely  what  phenomenon 
it  is  that  we  thus  so  minutely  measure,  we  meet  insur 
mountable  difficulties.  Newton  distinguished  time  accord 
ing  as  it  was  absolute  or  apparent  time,  in  the  following 
words  : — 

'  Absolute,  true,  and  mathematical  time  of  itself  and 
from  its  own  nature,  flows  equably  without  regard  to  any 
thing  external,  and  by  another  name  is  called  duration ; 
relative,  apparent  and  common  time,  is  some  sensible  and 
external  measure  of  duration  by  the  means  of  motion f'. 
Though  we  are  perhaps  obliged  to  assume  the  existence 
of  a  uniformly  increasing  quantity  which  we  call  time, 

e  Sir  G.  C.  Lewis  gives  many  curious  particulars  concerning  the  mea 
surement  of  time,  'Astronomy  of  the  Ancients,'  pp.  241,  &c. 

f  '  Principia/  bk.  i.  '  Scholium  to  Definitions.'  Translated  by  Motte, 
vol.  i.  p.  ix.  See  also,  p.  u. 


UNITS  AND  STANDARDS  OF  MEASUREMENT.       3G1 


yet  we  cannot  feel  or  know  abstract  and  absolute  time. 
Duration  must  be  made  manifest  to  us  by  the  recurrence 

»/ 

of  some  phenomenon.  The  succession  and  change  of  our 
own  thoughts  is  no.  doubt  the  first  and  simplest  measure 
of  time,  but  a  very  rude  one,  because  in  some  persons  and 
circumstances  the  thoughts  evidently  flow  with  much 
greater  rapidity  than  in  other  persons  and  circumstances. 
In  the  absence  of  all  other  phenomena,  the  interval  be 
tween  one  thought  and  another,  would  necessarily  become 
the  unit  of  time.  The  earth,  as  I  have  already  said,  is 
the  real  clock  of  the  astronomer,  and  is  practically  assumed 
as  invariable  in  its  movements.  But  on  what  ground  is 
it  so  assumed  ?  According  to  the  first  law  of  motion,  every 
body  perseveres  in  its  state  of  rest  or  of  uniform  motion 
in  a  right  line,  unless  it  is  compelled  to  change  that  state 
by  forces  impressed  thereon.  Rotatory  motion  is  subject 
to  a  like  condition,  namely,  that  it  perseveres  uniformly 
unless  disturbed  by  extrinsic  forces.  Now  uniform  mo 
tion  means  motion  through  equal  spaces  in  equal  times, 
so  that  if  we  have  a  body  entirely  free  from  all  resistance 
or  perturbation,  and  can  measure  equal  spaces  of  its  path, 
we  have  a  perfect  measure  of  time.  But  let  it  be  remem 
bered  at  the  same  time,  that  this  law  has  never  been 
absolutely  proved  by  experience ;  for  we  cannot  point  to 
any  body,  and  say  that  it  is  wholly  unresisted  or  undis 
turbed  ;  and  even  if  we  had  such  a  body,  we  should  need 
some  entirely  independent  standard  of  time  to  ascertain 
wrhether  its  motion  was  really  uniform.  As  it  is  in  moving 
bodies  that  we  find  the  best  standard  of  time,  we  cannot 
theoretically  speaking  use  them  to  prove  the  uniformity 
of  their  own  movements,  which  would  amount  to  a  petitio 
principii.  Our  experience  amounts  to  this,  that  when 
we  examine  and  compare  the  movements  of  bodies  which 
seem  to  us  nearly  free  from  disturbance,  we  find  them 
give  nearly  harmonious  measures  of  time.  If  any  one 


3G2  THE    PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

body  which  seems  to  us  to  move  uniformly  is  not  doing 
so,  but  is  subject  to  fits  and  starts  unknown  to  us,  because 
we  have  no  absolute  standard  of  time,  then  all  other 
bodies  must  be  subject  to  exactly  the  same  arbitrary  fits 
and  starts,  otherwise  there  would  be  a  discrepancy  be 
tween  them  disclosing  the  irregularities.  Just  as  in  com 
paring  together  a  number  of  chronometers,  we  should 
soon  detect  bad  ones  by  their  irregular  going,  as  measured 
by  the  others,  so  in  nature  we  detect  disturbed  movement 
by  its  discrepancy  from  that  of  other  bodies,  which  we 
believe  to  be  undisturbed,  and  which  agree  very  nearly 
among  themselves.  But  inasmuch  as  the  measure  of  motion 

O 

involves  time,  and  the  measure  of  time  involves  motion, 
there  must  be  ultimately  an  assumption.  We  may  define 
equal  times,  as  times  during  which  a  moving  body  under 
the  influence  of  no  force  describes  equal  spaces  e,  but  all 
we  can  say  in  its  support  is,  that  it  leads  us  into  no 
known  difficulties,  and  that  to  the  best  of  our  experience, 
one  freely  moving  body  gives  exactly  the  same  results  as 
any  other. 

When  we  inquire  where  the  freely  moving  body  is,  no 
satisfactory  answer  can  be  given.  Practically  the  rotating 
globe  is  sufficiently  accurate,  and  Thomson  and  Tait  say  : 
'  Equal  times  are  times  during  which  the  earth  turns 
through  equal  angles11'.  No  long  time  has  passed  since 
astronomers  thought  it  impossible  to  detect  any  inequality 
in  its  movement.  Poisson  was  supposed  to  have  proved 
that  a  change  in  the  length  of  the  sidereal  day,  amounting 
to  one  ten-millionth  part  in  2500  years,  was  incompatible 
with  an  ancient  eclipse  recorded  by  the  Chaldeans,  and 
similar  calculations  were  made  by  Laplace.  But  it  is  now 
known  that  these  calculations  were  somewhat  in  error, 

8  Rankine,  'Philosophical  Magazine/  Feb.  1867,  vol.  xxxiii.  p.  91. 
b  '  Treatise  on  Natural  Philosophy,'  vol.  i.  p.  179. 


UNITS  AND  STANDARDS  OF  MEASUREMENT.        363 

and  that  the  dissipation  of  energy  arising  out  of  the  fric 
tion  of  tidal  waves,  and  the  radiation  of  the  heat  into 
space,  has  slightly  decreased  the  rapidity  of  the  earth's 
rotatory  motion.  The  sidereal  day  is  now  longer  by  one 
part  in  2,700,000,  than  it  was  in  720  B.C.  Even  before 
this  discovery,  it  was  certain  that  the  invariable  rotation 
depended  upon  the  perfect  maintenance  of  the  earth's 
internal  heat,  which  is  requisite  in  order  that  the  earth's 
dimensions  shall  be  unaltered.  Now  the  earth  being  far 
superior  in  temperature  to  empty  space,  must  cool  more 
or  less  rapidly,  so  that  it  cannot  furnish  an  absolute 
measure  of  time.  Similar  objections  could  be  raised  to 
all  other  rotating  bodies  within  our  cognizance. 

The  moon's  motion  round  the  earth,  and  the  earth's 
motion  round  the  sun,  form  the  next  best  measure  of 
time.  They  are  subject,  indeed,  to  all  kinds  of  disturb 
ance  from  other  planets,  but  it  is  believed  that  these 
must  in  the  course  of  time  run  through  their  rhythmical 
courses,  and  leave  the  mean  distances  unaffected,  and  con 
sequently,  by  the  third  Law  of  Kepler,  the  periodic  times 
unchanged.  But  there  is  more  reason  than  not  to  believe 
that  the  earth  encounters  a  certain  slight  resistance  in 
passing  through  space,  like  that  which  is  so  apparent  in 
Encke's  comet.  There  may  also  be  a  certain  dissipation 
of  energy  in  the  electrical  relations  of  the  earth  to  the 

<_/»/ 

sun,  possibly  identical  with  that  which  is  manifested  in 
the  retardation  of  comets1.  It  is  probably  an  untrue 
assumption  then,  that  the  earth's  orbit  remains  quite 
invariable,  and  if  so  our  last  hope  of  getting  a  really 
uniform  measure  of  time  disappears,  and  we  are  reduced 
to  accepting  such  as  are  sufficient  for  all  practical  pur 
poses. 

i  '  Proceedings  of  the  Manchester  Philosophical  Society,'  28th  Nov. 
1871,  vol.  xi.  p.  33. 


364  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

It  is  just  possible  that  in  the  course  of  time,  some  other 
body  may  be  found  to  furnish  a  better  standard  of  time 
than  the  earth  in  its  annual  motion.  The  greatly  superior 
mass  of  Jupiter  and  its  satellites,  and  their  greater 
distance  from  the  sun,  may  render  the  electrical  dissipa 
tion  of  energy  less  considerable  even  than  in  the  case  of 
the  earth.  But  the  choice  of  the  best  measure  will  always 
be  an  open  one,  "and  whatever  moving  body  we  assume, 
may  ultimately  be  shown  to  be  subject  to  disturbing 
forces. 

The  pendulum,  although  so  admirable  an  instrument 
for  subdivision  of  time,  entirely  fails  as  a  standard ;  for 
though  the  same  pendulum  affected  by  the  same  force  of 
gravity  would  perform  equal  vibrations  in  equal  times, 
yet  the  slightest  change  in  the  form  or  weight  of  the 
pendulum,  the  slightest  corrosion  of  any  part,  or  the  most 
minute  displacement  of  the  point  of  suspension,  would 
falsify  the  results,  and  there  enter  many  other  diffi 
cult  questions  of  temperature,  resistance,  length  of  vibra 
tion,  &c. 

Thomson  and  Tait  are  of  opinion k  that  the  ultimate 
standard  of  chronometry  must  be  founded  on  the  physical 
properties  of  some  body  of  more  constant  character  than 
the  earth ;  for  instance,  a  carefully  arranged  metallic 
spring,  hermetically  sealed  in  an  exhausted  glass  vessel. 
Although  their  suggestion  is  no  doubt  theoretically  cor 
rect,  it  is  hard  to  see  how  we  can  be  sure  that  the  dimen 
sions  and  elasticity  of  a  piece  of  wrought  metal  will 
remain  perfectly  unchanged  for  the  few  millions  of  years 
contemplated  by  them.  A  nearly  perfect  gas,  like  hydrogen, 
is  perhaps  the  only  kind  of  substance  in  the  unchanged 
elasticity  of  which  we  could  have  confidence.  Moreover, 
it  is  difficult  to  perceive  how  the  undulations  of  such  a 

k  'The  Elements  of  Natural  Philosophy/  pai't  i.  p.  119. 


UNITS  AND  STANDARDS  OF  MEASUREMENT.       3G5 

spring  could  be  observed  with  the  requisite  accuracy.  We 
thus  appear  to  be  devoid  of  any  hope  of  establishing  a 
sure  standard  of  the  efflux  of  time. 

The  Unit  of  Space  and  the  Bar  Standard. 

Next  in  importance  after  the  measurement  of  time  is 
that  of  space.  Time  comes  first  in  theory,  because  pheno 
mena,  our  internal  thoughts  for  instance,  may  change  in 
time  without  regard  to  space  magnitude.  As  to  the  phe 
nomena  of  outward  nature,  they  tend  more  and  more  to  re 
solve  themselves  into  the  motion  of  molecules,  and  motion 
cannot  be  conceived  or  measured  without  reference  both 
to  time  and  space. 

Turning  now  to  space  measurements,  we  find  it  almost 
equally  difficult  to  fix  and  define  once  and  for  ever,  a  unit 
magnitude.  There  are  three  different  modes  in  which 
it  has  been  proposed  to  attempt  the  perpetuation  of  a 
standard  length. 

1 i )  By  constructing  an  actual  specimen  of  the  standard 
yard  or  metre,  in  the  form  of  a  bar. 

(2)  By  assuming  the  globe  itself  to  be  the  ultimate 
standard  of  magnitude,  the   practical  unit  being  a  sub- 
multiple  of  some  dimension  of  the  globe. 

(3)  By   adopting   the    length    of  a   simple    pendulum, 
beating  seconds  as  a  standard  of  reference. 

At  first  sight  it  might  seem  that  there  was  no  great 
difficulty  in  this  matter,  and  that  any  one  of  these  methods 
might  serve  well  enough ;  but  the  more  minutely  we 
inquire  into  the  details,  the  more  hopeless  appears  to  be 
the  attempt  to  establish  an  invariable  standard.  We  must 
in  the  first  place  point  out  a  principle  not  of  an  obvious 
character,  namely,  that  the  standard  length  must  be  defined 
by  one  single  object1.  To  make  two  bars  of  exactly  the 

1  See  Harris'  'Essay  upon  Money  and  Coins/  part  ii.  [1758]  p.  127. 


3GG  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

same  length,  or  even  two  bars  bearing  a  perfectly  defined 
ratio  to  each  other,  is  beyond  the  power  of  human  art.  If 
two  copies  of  the  standard  metre  be  made  and  declared 
equally  correct,  future  investigators  will  certainly  discover 
some  discrepancy  between  them,  proving  of  course  that  they 
cannot  both  be  the  standard,  and  giving  cause  for  dispute 
as  to  what  magnitude  should  then  be  taken  as  correct. 

If  one  invariable  bar  could  be  constructed  and  main 
tained  as  the  absolute  standard,  no  such  inconvenience 
could  arise.  Each  successive  generation  as  it  acquired 
higher  powers  of  measurement,  would  detect  errors  in 
the  copies  of  the  standard,  but  the  standard  itself  would 
be  unimpeached,  and  would,  as  it  were,  become  by  degrees 
more  and  more  accurately  known.  Unfortunately  to  con 
struct  and  preserve  a  metre  or  yard  is  also  a  task  which 
is  either  impossible,  or  what  comes  nearly  to  the  same 
thing,  cannot  be  shown  to  be  possible.  Passing  over  the 
practical  difficulty  of  defining  the  ends  of  the  standard 
length  with  complete  accuracy,  whether  by  dots  or  lines 
on  the  surface,  or  by  the  terminal  points  of  the  bar,  we 
have  no  means  of  proving  that  substances  remain  of  in 
variable  dimensions.  Just  as  we  cannot  tell  whether  the 
rotation  of  the  earth  is  uniform,  except  by  comparing  it 
with  other  moving  bodies,  believed  to  be  more  uniform 
in  motion,  so  we  cannot  detect  the  change  of  length  in  a 
bar,  except  by  comparing  it  with  some  other  bar  sup 
posed  to  be  invariable.  But  how  are  we  to  know  which 
is  the  invariable  bar  1  It  is  certain  that  many  rigid 
and  apparently  invariable  substances  do  change  in  di 
mensions.  The  bulb  of  a  thermometer  certainly  contracts 
by  age,  besides  undergoing  rapid  changes  -of  dimensions 
when  warmed  or  cooled  through  100°  Cent.m  Can  we 

111  Watts'  'Dictionary  of  Chemistry/  vol.  v.  pp.  766,  ^67.  Dr.  Joule 
has  recently  confirmed  the  statements  concerning  the  contraction  of  a 
thermometer-bulb. 


UNITS  AND  STANDARDS  OF  MEASUREMENT.       367 

be  sure  that  even  the  most  solid  metallic  bars  do  not 
slightly  contract  by  age,  or  undergo  variations  in  their 
structure  by  change  of  temperature.  M.  Fizeau  was  in 
duced  to  try  whether  a  quartz  crystal,  subjected  to  several 
hundred  alternations  of  temperature,  would  be  modified  in 
its  physical  properties,  and  he  was  unable  to  detect  any 
change  in  the  coefficients  of  expansion11.  It  does  not 
follow  however,  that,  because  no  apparent  change  was 
discovered  in  a  quartz  crystal,  newly-constructed  bars  of 
metal  would  undergo  no  change. 

The  only  principle,  as  it  seems  to  me,  upon  which  the 
perpetuation  of  a  standard  of  length  can  be  ultimately 
rested,  is  that,  if  a  variation  of  length  occurs,  it  will  in 
all  probability  be  of  different  amount  in  different  sub 
stances.  If  then  a  great  number  of  standard  metres  were 
constructed  of  all  kinds  of  different  metals,  alloys;  hard 
rocks,  such  as  granite,  serpentine,  slate,  quartz,  limestone  ; 
artificial  substances,  such  as  porcelain,  glass,  &c.,  &c.,  care 
ful  comparison  would  show  from  time  to  time  the  com 
parative  variations  of  length  of  these  different  substances. 
The  most  variable  substances  would  be  the  most  divergent, 
and  the  true  standard  would  be  furnished  by  the  mean 
length  of  those  which  agreed  most  closely  with  each  other, 
just  as  uniform  motion  is  that  of  those  bodies  which  agree 
most  closely  in  indicating  the  efflux  of  time. 

The  Terrestrial  Standard. 

The  second  method  assumes  that  the  globe  itself  is  a 
body  of  invariable  dimensions.  The  founders  of  the  me 
trical  system  selected  the  ten-millionth  part  of  the  dis 
tance  from  the  equator  to  the  pole  as  the  definition  of  the 
metre,  and  the  late  Sir  John  Herschel  proposed0  that 

11  'Philosophical  Magazine/  (1868),  4th  Scries,  vol.  xxxvi.  p.  32. 
0  '  Familiar  Lectures  on  Scientific  Subjects,'  (1866)  p.  191. 


3G8  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

the  English  inch,  which  is  now  almost  exactly  the 
5OO,5oo,oooth  part  of  the  polar  axis  of  the  earth,  should 
be  made  exactly  equal  to  the  5OO,ooo,oooth  part,  and  be 
adopted  as  our  standard.  The  first  imperfection  in  such 
a  method  is  that  the  earth  is  certainly  not  invariable  in 
size;  for  we  know  that  it  is  superior  in  temperature  to  sur 
rounding  space,  and  must  be  slowly  cooling  and  contract 
ing.  There  is  much  reason  to  believe  that  all  earthquakes, 
volcanoes,  mountain  elevations,  and  changes  of  sea  level, 
are  evidences  of  this  contraction  as  asserted  by  Mr.  Mallet  P. 
But  such  is  the  vast  bulk  of  the  earth  and  the  duration 
of  its  past  existence,  that  this  contraction  is  perhaps  less 
rapid  in  proportion  than  that  of  any  bar  or  other  material 
standard  which  we  can  construct. 

The  second  and  chief  difficulty  of  this  method  arises 
from  the  vast  size  of  the  earth,  which  prevents  us  from 
making  any  comparison  with  the  ultimate  standard,  ex 
cept  by  a  trigonometrical  survey  of  a  most  elaborate  and 
costly  kind.  The  French  physicists,  who  first  proposed 
the  method,  attempted  to  obviate  this  inconvenience  by 
carrying  out  the  survey  once  for  all,  and  then  constructing 
a  standard  metre,  which  should  be  exactly  the  one  ten 
millionth  part  of  the  distance  from  the  pole  to  the 
equator.  But  since  all  measuring  operations  are  merely 
approximate,  as  so  often  stated  in  previous  pages,  it  was 
impossible  that  this  operation  could  be  perfectly  achieved. 
Accordingly  it  was  shown  by  Colonel  Puissant  in  1838, 
that  the  supposed  French  metre  was  erroneous  to  the  con 
siderable  extent  of  one  part  in  5527,  the  quadrant  of  the 
earth's  circumference  measuring  10,001,789  instead  of 
10,000,000  of  such  metres.  It  then  became  necessary 
either  to  alter  the  length  of  the  assumed  metre,  or 
otherwise  to  abandon  its  supposed  relation  to  the  earth's 
dimensions. 

P  'Proceedings  of  the  Koyal  Society,'  20th  June,  1872,  vol.  xx.  p.  438. 


UNITS  AND  STANDARDS  OF  MEASUREMENT.       369 

The  French  Government  and  the  present  International 
Metrical  Commission  have  for  obvious  reasons  decided  in 
favour  of  the  latter  course,  and  have  thus  reverted  to  the 
first  method  of  defining  the  metre  by  a  given  bar.  As 
from  time  to  time  the  ratio  between  this  assumed 
standard  metre  and  the  dimensions  of  the  earth  becomes 
more  and  more  accurately  known,  we  have  the  better 
means  of  restoring  that  metre  by  actual  reference  to  the 
globe  if  required.  But  until  lost,  destroyed,  or  for  some 
clear  reason  discredited,  the  bar  metre  and  not  the  globe 
is  the  standard.  Any  of  the  more  accurate  measurements 
of  the  English  trigonometrical  survey  might  in  like 
manner  be  employed  to  restore  our  standard  yard,  in  terms 
of  which  the  results  are  recorded  ^ 

The  Pendulum  Standard. 

The  third  method  of  defining  a  standard  length,  by 
reference  to  the  seconds'  pendulum,  was  first  proposed  by 
Huyghens,  and  was  at  one  time  adopted  by  the  English 
Government.  From  the  principle  of  the  pendulum  (p.  353) 
it  clearly  appears  that  if  the  time  of  oscillation  and  the 
force  actuating  the  pendulum  be  the  same,  the  length 
must  be  the  same.  We  do  not  get  rid  of  theoretical 
difficulties,  for  we  must  practically  assume  the  attraction 
of  gravity  at  some  point  of  the  earth's  surface,  say 
London,  to  be  unchanged  from  time  to  time,  and  the 
sidereal  day  to  be  invariable,  neither  assumption  being 
absolutely  correct  so  far  as  we  can  judge.  The  pendulum, 
in  short,  is  only  an  indirect  means  of  making  one  physi 
cal  quantity  of  space  depend  upon  two  other  physical 
quantities  of  time  and  force. 

The  practical  difficulties  are,  however,  of  a  far  more 

q  Thomson  and  Tait's  '  Elements  of  Natural  Philosophy/  Part  i. 
p.  119. 

Bb 


370  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

serious  character  than  the  theoretical  ones.  The  length 
of  a  pendulum  is  not  the  ordinary  length  of  the  instru 
ment,  which  might  be  greatly  varied,  without  affecting 
the  duration  of  a  vibration,  but  the  distance  from  the 
centre  of  suspension  to  the  centre  of  oscillation.  There  is 
no  direct  means  of  determining  this  centre,  which  depends 
upon  the  average  momentum  of  all  the  particles  of  the 
pendulum  as  regards  the  centre  of  suspension.  Huyghens 
discovered  that  the  centres  of  suspension  and  oscillation 
are  interchangeable,  and  Captain  Kater  pointed  out  that 
if  a  pendulum  vibrates  with  exactly  the  same  rapidity 
when  suspended  from  two  different  points,  the  distance 
between  these  points  is  the  true  length  of  the  equivalent 
simple  pendulum1".  But  the  practical  difficulties  in  em 
ploying  Rater's  reversible  pendulum  are  considerable,  and 
questions  regarding  the  disturbance  of  the  air,  the  force 
of  gravity  or  even  the  interference  of  electrical  attractions 
have  to  be  entertained.  It  has  been  shown  that  all  the 
experiments  made  under  the  authority  of  government  for 
establishing  the  ratio  between  the  standard  yard  and  the 
seconds'  pendulum,  were  vitiated  by  an  error  in  the  correc 
tions  for  the  resisting,  adherent  or  buoyant  power  of  the 
air  in  which  the  pendulum  swung.  Even  if  such  correc 
tions  were  rendered  unnecessary  by  operating  in  a  vacuum, 
other  difficult  questions  remain3.  Gauss'  mode  of  com 
paring  the  vibrations  of  a  wire  pendulum  when  suspended 
at  two  different  lengths  is  open  to  equal  or  greater  practi 
cal  difficulties.  Thus  it  is  found  that  the  pendulum 
standard  cannot  compete  in  accuracy  arid  certainty  with 
the  simple  bar  standard,  and  the  method  would  only  be 
useful  as  an  accessory  mode  of  restoring  the  bar  standards 
if  at  any  time  again  destroyed. 

r  Rater's  '  Treatise  on  Mechanics/  Cabinet  Cyclopaedia,  p.  154. 
8  Grant's  '  History  of  Physical  Astronomy,'  p.  156. 


UNITS  AND  STANDARDS  OF  MEASUREMENT.       371 


Unit  of  Density. 

Before  we  can  measure  and  define  the  phenomena  of 
nature,  we  require  a  third  independent  unit,  which  shall 
enable  us  to  define  the  quantity  of  matter  which  occupies 
any  given  space.  All  the  motions  and  changes  of  nature, 
as  we  shall  see,  are  probably  so  many  manifestations  of 
energy  ;  but  energy  requires  some  substratum  or  material 
machinery  of  molecules,  in  and  by  which  it  may  be 
exerted.  Very  little  observation  shows  that,  as  regards 
force,  there  may  be  two  modes  of  variation  of  matter. 
The  force  required  to  set  a  body  in  motion,  varies  in 
simple  proportion  to  the  bulk  or  cubic  dimensions  of  the 
matter,  but  also  according  to  its  quality.  Two  cubic 
inches  of  iron  of  uniform  quality,  will  require  twice  as 
much  force  to  produce  a  certain  velocity  in  a  given  time 
as  one  cubic  inch  ;  but  one  cubic  inch  of  gold  will  require 
more  force  than  one  cubic  inch  of  iron.  There  is  then 
some  new  measurable  quality  in  matter  apart  from  its 
bulk,  which  we  may  call  density,  and  which  is,  strictly 
speaking,  indicated  by  its  capacity  to  resist  and  absorb 
the  action  of  force.  For  the  unit  of  density  we  may 
assume  that  of  any  substance  which  is  uniform  in  quality, 
and  can  readily  be  referred  to  from  time  to  time.  Pure 
water  at  any  definite  temperature,  for  instance  that  of 
snow  melting  under  an  inappreciable  pressure,  furnishes 
a  natural  and  invariable  standard  of  density,  and  by 
testing  equal  bulks  of  various  substances  compared  with  a 
like  bulk  of  ice-cold  water,  as  regards  the  velocity  pro 
duced  in  a  unit  of  time  by  the  same  force,  we  should 
ascertain  the  densities  of  those  substances  as  expressed  in 
that  of  water. 

Practically  the   force  of  gravity  is    used   to   measure 
density  ;  for  a  simple  and  beautiful  experiment  with  the 

B  b  2 


372  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

pendulum,  performed  by  Newton  and  Gauss,  shows  that 
all  kinds  of  matter  equally  gravitate,  that  is,  the  attractive 
power  of  a  substance  is  exactly  proportional  to  its  density. 
Two  portions  of  matter  then  which  are  in  equilibrium  in 
the  balance,  may  be  assumed  to  possess  equal  inertia,  and 
their  densities  will  therefore  be  inversely  as  their  cubic 
dimensions. 

Unit  of  Mass. 

Multiplying  the  number  of  units  of  density  of  a  portion 
of  matter,  by  the  number  of  units  of  space  occupied  by  it, 
we  arrive  at  the  quantity  of  matter,  or,  as  it  is  usually 
called,  the  units  of  mass,  as  indicated  by  the  inertia  and 
gravity  it  possesses.  To  proceed  in  the  most  simple  and 
logical  manner,  the  unit  of  mass  ought  to  be  that  of  a 
cubic  unit  of  matter  of  the  standard  density.  The 
founders  of  the  French  metrical  system  took  as  their  unit 
of  mass,  the  cubic  centimetre  of  water,  at  the  temperature 
of  maximum  density  (about  4°  Centigrade).  They  called 
this  unit  of  mass  the  gramme,  and  constructed  standard 
specimens  of  the  kilogram,  which  might  be  readily  re 
ferred  to  by  all  who  required  to  employ  accurate  weights. 
Unfortunately,  however,  the  determination  of  the  bulk  of 
a  given  weight  of  water  at  a  certain  temperature  is  an 
operation  involving  many  practical  and  theoretical  dif 
ficulties,  and  it  can  not  be  performed  in  the  present  day 
with  a  greater  exactness  than  that  of  about  one  part  in 
5000,  the  results  of  careful  observers  being  sometimes 
found  to  differ  as  much  as  one  part  in  1000*. 

Weights,  on  the  other  hand,  can  be  compared  with 
each  other  to  at  least  one  part  in  a  million.  Hence  if 
different  specimens  of  the  kilogram  be  prepared  by  direct 

*  Clerk  Maxwell's  'Theory  of  Heat/  p.  79. 


UNITS  AND  STANDARDS  OF  MEASUREMENT.       373 

weighing  against  water,  they  will  not  agree  very  closely 
with  each  other  ;  and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  two  principal 
standard  kilograms  neither  agree  with  each  other,  nor 
with  their  true  definition  u.  The  so-called  Kilogram  des 
Archives  weighs  15432-34874  grains  according  to  Prof. 
W  H.  Miller,  while  the  kilogram  deposited  at  the 
Ministry  of  the  Interior  in  Paris,  as  the  standard  for 
commercial  purposes,  weighs  15432*344  grains x. 

Now  since  a  standard  weight  constructed  of  platinum, 
or  platinum  and  iridium,  can  be  preserved  in  all  proba 
bility  free  from  any  appreciable  alteration,  and  since  it 
can  be  very  accurately  compared  with  other  weights,  we 
shall  ultimately  attain  the  greatest  exactness  in  our 
recorded  measurements  of  weight  and  mass,  by  assuming 
some  single  standard  kilogram  as  a  provisional  standard, 
leaving  the  determination  of  its  actual  mass  in  units  of 
space  and  density  for  future  investigation.  This  is  what 
is  practically  done  at  the  present  day,  and  thus  a  unit  of 
mass  takes  the  place  of  the  unit  of  density,  both  in  the 
French  and  the  present  English  systems.  The  English 
pound  is  defined  by  a  certain  lump  of  platinum,  carefully 
preserved  at  Westminster,  and  is  an  entirely  arbitrary 
mass,  made  to  agree  as  nearly  as  possible  with  old  English 
pounds.  The  gallon,  the  old  English  unit  of  cubic  mea 
surement,  is  defined  by  the  condition  that  it  shall  con 
tain  exactly  ten  pounds  weight  of  water  at  62°  Fahr.;  and 
although  it  is  stated  that  it  has  the  capacity  of  about 
277^274  cubic  inches,  this  ratio  between  the  cubic  and 
linear  system  of  measurement  is  not  legally  enacted,  but 
is  left  open  to  investigation  from  time  to  time.  While 
the  French  metric  system  as  originally  designed  was 
theoretically  perfect,  it  does  not  seem  to  differ  practically 
in  this  point  from  the  English  system. 

"  Thomson    and    Tait's     'Treatise    on    Natural    Philosophy,'    vol.    i. 
p.  325.  *  Ibid. 


374  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

Subsidiary  Units. 

Having  once  established  the  standard  units  of  time, 
space,  and  density  or  mass,  we  might  employ  them  for  the 
expression  of  all  quantities  of  such  nature.  But  it  is  often 
found  convenient  in  particular  branches  of  science,  to  use 
multiples  or  submultiples  of  the  original  units,  for  the  ex 
pression  of  quantities,  in  a  clear  and  simple  manner.  We 
use  the  mile  rather  than  the  yard  when  treating  of  the 
magnitude  of  the  globe,  and  the  mean  distance  of  the  earth 
and  sun  is  not  too  large  a  unit  when  we  have  to  describe 

O 

the  distances  of  the  stars.  On  the  other  hand,  when  we  are 
occupied  with  microscopic  objects,  the  inch,  the  line  or  the 
millimetre,  become  the  most  convenient  terms  of  expression. 
It  is  allowable  for  a  scientific  man  to  introduce  a  new 
unit  in  any  branch  of  knowledge,  provided  that  it  assists 
precise  expression,  and  is  carefully  brought  into  relation 
with  the  primary  units.  Thus  Prof.  A.  W.  Williamson 
has  proposed  as  a  convenient  unit  in  chemical  science,  an 
absolute  volume  equal  to  about  11*2  litres,  representing 
the  bulk  of  one  gramme  of  hydrogen  gas  at  standard 
temperature  and  pressure,  or  the  equivalent  weight  of  any 
other  gas,  such  as  16  grammes  of  oxygen,  14  grammes 
of  nitrogen,  &c. ;  in  short,  the  bulk  of  that  quantity  of 
any  one  of  those  gases  which  weighs  as  many  grammes 
as  there  are  units  in  the  number  expressing  its  atomic 
weight y.  Professor  Hofmann  has  also  proposed  a  new  con 
crete  unit  for  chemists,  called  a  crith,  to  be  defined  by  the 
weight  of  one  cubic  decimetre  or  litre  of  hydrogen  gas 
at  o°  C.  and  o°'76mm.,  weighing  about  0*0896  grammes2. 
Both  these  units  if  adopted  must  be  regarded  as  purely 
subordinate  units,  ultimately  defined  by  reference  to  the 
primary  units,  and  not  involving  any  new  assumption. 

y  '  Chemistry  for  Students,'  by  A.  W.  Williamson.     Clarendon  Press 
Series,  2nd  ed.     Preface  p.  vi.    "  z  '  Introd.  to  Chemistry,'  p.  131. 


UNITS  AND  STANDARDS  OF  MEASUREMENT.       375 

Derived  Units. 

The  standard  units  of  time,  space,  and  mass  having  been 
once  fixed,  it  becomes  obvious  that  many  kinds  of  magnitude 
are  naturally  measured  by  units  immediately  derived  from 
one  or  more  of  the  three  principal  ones.  From  the  standard 
metre  of  linear  magnitude  follows  in  the  most  obvious 
manner  the  centaire  or  square  metre,  the  unit  of  super 
ficial  magnitude,  and  the  litre  or  cube  of  the  tenth  part 
of  a  metre,  the  standard  of  capacity  or  volume.  Velocity 
of  motion,  again,  is  expressed  by  the  ratio  of  the  space- 
passed  over,  when  the  motion  is  uniform,  to  the  time 
occupied ;  hence  the  unit  velocity  will  be  that  of  a 
body  which  passes  over  a  unit  of  space  in  a  unit  of  time, 
say  one  metre  per  second.  Momentum  is  measured  by 
the  mass  moving,  regard  being  paid  both  to  the  amount 
of  matter  and  the  velocity  at  which  it  is  moving.  Hence 
the  unit  of  momentum  wih1  be  that  of  a  unit  volume  of 
matter  of  the  unit  density  moving  with  the  unit  velocity, 
or  in  the  French  system,  a  cubic  centimetre  of  water  of 
the  maximum  density  moving  one  metre  per  second. 

An  accelerating  force  is  measured  by  the  ratio  of  the 
momentum  generated  to  the  time  occupied,  the  force 
being  supposed  to  act  uniformly.  The  unit  of  force  will 
therefore  be  that  which  generates  a  unit  of  momentum 
in  a  unit  of  time,  or  which  causes,  in  the  French  system, 
one  cubic  centimetre  of  water  at  maximum  density  to 
acquire  in  one  second  a  velocity  of  one  metre  per  second. 
The  force  of  gravity  is  the  most  familiar  kind  of  force, 
and  as  when  acting  unimpeded  upon  any  substance  it 
produces  in  a  second  a  velocity  of  9'8o868  ....  metres 
per  second  in  Paris,  it  follows  that  the  absolute  unit 
of  force  is  about  the  tenth  part  of  the  force  of  gravity. 
If  we  employ  British  weights  and  measures,  the  absolute 
unit  of  force  is  represented  by  the  gravity  of  about  half 


376  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

an  ounce,  since  the  force  of  gravity  of  any  portion  of 
matter  acting  upon  that  matter  during  one  second,  pro 
duces  a  final  velocity  of  3 2 '1889  feet  per  second  or  about 
32  units  of  velocity.  Although  from  its  perpetual  presence 
and  approximate  uniformity  we  find  in  gravity  the  most 
convenient  force  for  reference,  and  thus  habitually  employ 
it  to  estimate  quantities  of  matter  or  mass,  we  must  re 
member  that  it  is  only  one  of  many  instances  of  force. 
Strictly  speaking,  we  should  express  weight  in  terms  of 
force,  but  practically  we  express  all  forces  in  terms  of 
weight. 

We  still  require  the  unit  of  energy,  a  more  com 
plex  notion.  The  momentum  of  a  body  expresses  the 
quantity  of  motion  which  belongs  or  would  belong  to  the 
aggregate  of  the  particles,  but  when  we  consider  how  this 
motion  is  related  to  the  action  of  a  force  producing  or 
removing  it,  we  find  that  the  effect  of  a  force  is  pro 
portional  to  the  mass  multiplied  by  the  square  of  the 
velocity  and  it  is  most  convenient  to  take  half  this  product 
as  the  expression  required.  But  it  is  shown  in  books 
upon  Dynamics  that  it  will  be  exactly  the  same  thing  if 
we  define  energy  by  a  force  acting  through  a  certain  space. 
The  natural  unit  of  energy  will  then  be  that  which  over 
comes  a  unit  of  force  acting  through  a  unit  of  space  ;  when 
we  lift  one  kilogram  through  one  metre,  against  gravity, 
we  therefore  accomplish  9*80868  .  .  .  .  units  of  work, 
that  is,  we  turn  so  many  units  of  potential  energy  ex 
isting  in  the  muscles,  into  potential  energy  of  gravitation. 
In  lifting  one  pound  through  one  foot  there  is  in  like 
manner  a  conversion  of  32*1889  units  of  energy.  Accord 
ingly  the  unit  of  energy  will  be  that  required  to  lift  a 
kilogram  through  about  one  tenth  part  of  a  metre  against 
gravity,  or,  in  the  English  system,  to  lift  one  pound  through 
the  thirty-second  part  of  a  foot. 

Every  person  is  at  perfect  liberty  to  measure  and  record 


UNITS  AND  STANDARDS  OF  MEASUREMENT.        377 

quantities  in  terms  of  any  unit  which  he  likes  to  adopt. 
He  may  use  the  yard  for  linear  measurement  and  the 
litre  for  cubic  measurement,  only  there  will  then  be  a 
complicated  relation  between  his  different  results.  The 
system  of  derived  units  which  we  have  been  briefly  con 
sidering,  is  that  which  gives  the  most  simple  and  natural 
relation  between  quantitative  expressions  of  different 
kinds,  and  therefore  conduces  to  ease  of  comprehension 
and  saving  of  laborious  calculation. 

Provisionally  Independent  Units. 

Ultimately,  as  we  can  hardly  doubt,  all  phenomena 
will  be  recognised  as  so  many  manifestations  of  energy  ; 
and,  being  expressed  in  terms  of  the  unit  of  energy,  will 
be  referable  to  the  primary  units  of  space,  time,  and 
mass.  To  effect  this  reduction,  however,  in  any  particular 
case,  we  must  not  only  be  able  to  compare  different 
quantities  of  the  phenomenon,  but  to  trace  the  whole 
series  of  steps  by  which  it  is  connected  with  the  primary 
notions.  We  can  readily  observe  that  the  intensity  of 
one  source  of  light  is  greater  than  that  of  another ;  and, 
knowing  that  the  intensity  of  light  decreases  as  the 
square  of  the  distance,  we  can  easily  determine  their 
comparative  brilliance.  Hence  we  can  express  the  inten 
sity  of  light  falling  upon  any  surface,  if  we  have  a  unit 
in  which  to  make  the  expression.  Light  is  undoubtedly 
one  form  of  energy,  and  the  unit  ought  therefore  to  be 
the  unit  of  energy.  But  at  present  it  is  quite  impossible 
to  say  how  much  energy  there  is  in  any  particular 
amount  of  light.  The  question  then  arises, — Are  we  to 
defer  the  measurement  of  light  until  we  can  fully  and 
accurately  assign  its  relation  to  other  forms  of  energy  ? 
If  we  answer  Yes,  it  is  equivalent  to  saying  that  the 
science  of  light  must  stand  still  perhaps  for  a  generation  ; 


378  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

and  not  only  this  science  but  almost  every  other.  The 
true  course  evidently  is  to  select,  as  the  provisional  unit 
of  light,  some  light  of  convenient  intensity,  which  can  be 
reproduced  from  time  to  time  in  exactly  the  same  in 
tensity,  and  which  is  denned  by  physical  circumstances. 
All  the  phenomena  of  light  may  be  experimentally  investi 
gated  relatively  to  this  unit,  for  instance  that  obtained 
after  much  labour  by  Bunsen  and  Koscoea.  In  after 
years  it  will  become  a  matter  of  inquiry  what  is  the 
energy  exerted  in  such  unit  of  light ;  but  it  may  be  long 
before  the  relation  is  exactly  determined. 

A  provisionally  independent  unit,  then,  means  one  which 
is  assumed  and  physically  denned  in  a  safe  and  repro 
ducible  manner,  in  order  that  particular  quantities  may 
be  compared  inter  se  more  accurately  than  they  can  yet 
be  referred  to  the  primary  units.  In  reality  almost  all 
our  measurements  are  made  by  such  independent  units. 
Even  the  unit  of  mass  is  practically  an  independent  one, 
as  we  have  seen  (p.  373). 

Similarly  the  unit  of  heat  ought  to  be  simply  the 
unit  of  energy,  already  described.  But  a  weight  can 
be  measured  to  the  one-millionth  part,  and  temperature 
to  less  than  the  thousandth  part  of  a  degree  Fahrenheit, 
and  to  less  therefore  than  the  five-hundredth  thousandth 
part  of  the  absolute  temperature,  whereas  the  mechanical 
equivalent  of  heat  is  probably  not  known  to  the  thousandth 
part.  Hence  the  need  of  a  provisional  unit  of  heat,  which 
is  often  taken  as  that  requisite  to  raise  a  unit  weight  of 
water  (say  one  gramme)  through  one  degree  Centigrade 
of  temperature,  that  is  from  o°  to  i°.  This  quantity  of 
heat  is  capable  of  approximate  expression  in  terms  of 
time,  space,  and  mass ;  for  by  the  natural  constant, 
determined  by  Dr.  Joule,  and  called  the  mechanical 

a  '  Philosophical  Transactions  '  (1859),  vol.  cxlix.  p.  884,  &c. 


UNITS  AND  STANDARDS  OF  MEASUREMENT.       379 

equivalent  of  heat,  we  know  that  the  assumed  unit  of 
heat  is  equal  to  the  energy  of  423'55  gramme -metres, 
or  that  energy  which  will  raise  the  mass  of  423*55 
grammes  through  one  metre  against  9*80868  absolute 
units  of  force.  Heat  may  also  be  expressed  in  terms  of 
the  quantity  of  ice  at  o°  Cent.,  which  it  is  capable  of  con 
verting  into  water  under  an  inappreciable  pressure. 

The  science  of  electricity  has  lately  become  so  much  a 
matter  of  quantity,  that  it  is  necessary  to  have  some 
means  of  accurate  expression.  When  we  know  exactly 
the  mechanical  equivalent  of  electricity,  we  can  express 
quantities  of  electricity  in  terms  of  energy,  but  in  the 
meantime  we  need  some  easy  available  unit.  The  British 
Association  accordingly  have  selected  as  the  unit  of 
electrical  force  that  which  can  just  overcome  the  resistance 
offered  by  a  piece  of  pure  silver  wire  i  metre  in  length, 
and  i  millemetre  in  diameter.  This  unit  must  be  re 
garded  as  merely  a  convenient  provision  for  working 
purposes,  to  be  employed  for  the  easy  expression  of 
quantities  not  yet  brought  into  precise  relation  with  the 
ultimate  standards  of  time,  space,  and  mass.  There  may 
also  be  other  provisionally  independent  units  employed 
in  electrical  science,  such  as  the  voltametric  unit  of  cur 
rent  strength,  namely,  that  current  which  by  decomposing 
water  produces  one  cubic  centimetre  of  detonating  gas  at 
o°  Cent,  and  760  mm.  of  pressure  in  one  minute.  The  unit 
of  electrical  quantity,  again,  is  that  quantity  which  when 
concentrated  in  a  point  and  acting  on  an  equal  quantity 
also  concentrated  in  a  point  at  a  unit  of  distance,  exerts 
a  repulsion  equal  to  the  unit  of  force.  There  must  also 
be  a  unit  of  electro-magnetic  force.  All  these  electrical 
units  must,  however,  be  definitely  related  to  each  other, 
and  to  the  fundamental  units,  and  it  is  a  matter  for 
continual  investigation  to  determine  such  relations  more 
and  more  accurately. 


380  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

Natural  Constants  and  Numbers. 

Having  acquired  accurate  measuring  instruments,  and 
decided  upon  the  units  in  which  the  results  shall  be 
estimated  and  expressed,  there  remains  the  question, 
What  use  shall  he  made  of  our  powers  of  measurement  ? 
Our  principal  object  must  be  to  discover  general  quanti 
tative  laws  of  nature  ;  but  a  very  large  amount  of  pre 
liminary  labour  is  employed  in  the  accurate  determination 
of  the  dimensions  of  existing  objects,  and  the  numerical 
relations  between  diverse  forces  and  phenomena.  Step 
by  step  every  part  of  the  material  universe  is  surveyed 
and  brought  into  known  relations  with  other  parts.  Each 
manifestation  of  energy  is  correlated  with  each  other  kind 
of  manifestation.  Professor  Tyndall  has  described  the  care 
with  which  such  operations  are  conducted  b. 

'Those  who  are  unacquainted  with  the  details  of 
scientific  investigation,  have  no  idea  of  the  amount  of 
labour  expended  on  the  determination  of  those  numbers 
on  which  important  calculations  or  inferences  depend. 
They  have  no  idea  of  the  patience  shown  by  a  Berzelius 
in  determining  atomic  weights ;  by  a  Eegnault  in  deter 
mining  coefficients  of  expansion ;  or  by  a  Joule  in  deter 
mining  the  mechanical  equivalent  of  heat.  There  is  a 
morality  brought  to  bear  upon  such  matters  which,  in 
point  of  severity,  is  probably  without  a  parallel  in  any 
other  domain  of  intellectual  action/ 

Every  new  natural  constant  which  is  recorded  brings 
many  fresh  inferences  within  our  power.  For  if  n  be  the 
number  of  such  constants  known,  then  ^  (n2—  n)  is  the 
number  of  ratios  which  are  within  our  powers  of  cal 
culation,  and  this  increases  with  the  square  of  n.  We 
thus  gradually  piece  together  a  map  of  nature,  in  which 
the  lines  of  inference  from  one  phenomenon  to  another 

b  Tyndall's  '  Sound/  ist  ed.  p.  26. 


UNITS  AND  STANDARDS  OF  MEASUREMENT.       381 

rapidly  grow  in  complexity,  and  the  powers  of  scientific 
prediction  are  correspondingly  augmented. 

The  late  Mr.  Babbagec  proposed  the  formation  of  a 
complete  collection  of  all  the  constant  numbers  of  nature  ; 
but  such  a  collection  would  be  almost  coextensive  with 
the  whole  mass  of  scientific  literature.  Almost  all  numbers 
occurring  in  works  on  Chemistry,  Mineralogy,  Physics, 
Astronomy,  &c.  are  natural  constants,  and  it  would  be 
impracticable  to  give  in  any  one  work  more  than  a 
selection  of  the  more  important  numbers. 

Our  present  object  will  be  to  classify  these  constant 
numbers  roughly,  according  to  their  comparative  gener 
ality  and  importance,  under  the  following  heads  : — 

(1)  Mathematical  constants. 

(2)  Physical  constants. 

(3)  Astronomical  constants. 

(4)  Terrestrial  numbers. 

(5)  Organic  numbers. 

(6)  Social  numbers. 

Mathematical  Constants. 

At  the  head  of  the  list  of  natural  constants  must  come 
those  which  express  the  necessary  relations  of  numbers 
to  each  other.  The  ordinary  Multiplication  Table  is  the 
most  familiar  and  the  most  important  of  such  series  of 
constants,  and  is,  theoretically  speaking,  infinite  in  extent. 
Next  we  must  place  the  Arithmetical  Triangle,  the  sig 
nificance  of  which  has  already  been  pointed  out  (p.  206.) 
Tables  of  logarithms  also  contain  vast  series  of  natural 
constants,  arising  out  of  the  relations  of  pure  numbers. 
At  the  base  of  all  logarithmic  theory  is  the  mysterious 
natural  constant  commonly  denoted  by  E,  e,  or  e,  being 

equal  to  the  infinite  series  i  +  -  + 1 — - — I \- . , 

i      1.2     1.2.3      1-2.3.4 

c  British  Association,  Cambridge,  1833.    Report,  pp.  484-490. 


382  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

and  thus  consisting  of  the  sum  of  the  ratios  between  the 
numbers  of  permutations  and  combinations  of  o,  i ,  2,  3,  4, 
&c.  tilings. 

Tables  of  prime  numbers  and  of  the  factors  of  composite 
numbers  must  not  be  forgotten. 

Another  vast  and  in  fact  infinite  series  of  numerical 
constants  contains  those  connected  with  the  measure 
ment  of  angles,  and  embodied  in  trigonometrical  tables, 
whether  as  natural  or  logarithmic  sines,  cosines,  and 
tangents.  It  should  never  be  forgotten  that  though 
these  numbers  find  their  chief  employment  in  connexion 
with  trigonometry,  or  the  measurement  of  the  sides  of  a 
right-angled  triangle,  yet  the  numbers  themselves  arise 
out  of  simple  numerical  relations  bearing  no  special  rela 
tion  to  space. 

Foremost  among  trigonometrical  constants  is  the  well 
known  number  v,  usually  employed  as  expressing  the 
ratio  of  the  circumference  and  the  diameter  of  a  circle ; 
from  TT  follows  the  value  of  the  arcual  or  natural  unit 
of  angular  value  as  expressed  in  ordinary  degrees  (see 

P-  358). 

Among  other  mathematical  constants  not  uncommonly 
used  may  be  mentioned  tables  of  factorials  (p.  202),  tables 
of  Bernouilli's  numbers,  tables  of  the  error  function11, 
which  latter  are  indispensable  not  only  in  the  theory  of 
probability  but  also  in  several  other  branches  of  science. 

It  should  also  be  clearly  understood  that  the  mathe 
matical  constants  and  tables  of  reference  already  in  our 
possession,  although  very  extensive,  are  only  an  infinitely 
small  part  of  what  might  be  formed.  With  the  progress 
of  science  the  tabulation  of  new  functions  will  be  con 
tinually  demanded,  and  it  is  worthy  of  consideration 
whether  public  money  should  not  be  constantly  available 

d  See  J.  W.  L.  Glaisher,  '  Philosophical  Magazine/  4th  Series,  vol.  xlii. 
p.  421. 


UNITS  AND  STANDARDS  OF  MEASUREMENT.       383 


to  reward  the  enormous  labour  which  must  be  undertaken 
in  these  calculations.  Such  labours  once  successfully  com 
pleted  must  benefit  the  whole  human  race  as  long  as  it 
shall  exist.  A  valuable  account  of  all  the  chief  mathe 
matical  tables  yet  published  will  be  found  in  De  Morgan's 
article  on  Tables,  in  the  '  English  Cyclopaedia,'  Division 
of  Arts  and  Sciences,  vol.  vii.  p.  976. 

Physical  Constants. 

The  second  class  of  constants  contains  those  which  refer 
to  the  actual  constitution  of  matter.  For  the  most  part 
they  depend  upon  the  peculiarities  of  the  chemical  sub 
stance  in  question,  but  we  may  begin  with  those  which 
are  of  the  most  general  character.  In  a  first  sub-class 
we  may  place  the  velocity  of  light  or  heat  undulations, 
the  numbers  expressing  the  relation  between  the  lengths 
of  the  undulations,  and  the  rapidity  of  the  undulations, 
these  numbers  depending  only  on  the  properties  of  the 
ethereal  medium,  and  being  probably  the  same  in  all  parts 
of  the  universe.  The  theory  of  heat  gives  rise  to  several 
numbers  of  the  highest  importance,  especially  Joule's 
mechanical  equivalent  of  heat,  the  absolute  zero  of  tempe 
rature,  the  mean  temperature  of  empty  space,  &c. 

Taking  into  account  the  diverse  properties  of  the 
elements  we  must  have  tables  of  the  atomic  weights, 
the  specific  heats,  the  specific  gravities,  the  refractive 
powers,  not  only  of  the  elements,  but  their  almost  in 
finitely  numerous  compounds.  The  properties  of  hardness, 
elasticity,  viscosity,  expansion  by  heat,  conducting  powers 
for  heat  and  electricity,  must  also  be  determined  in 
immense  detail.  There  are,  however,  certain  of  these 
numbers  which  stand  out  prominently  because  they  serve 
as  intermediate  units  or  terms  of  comparison.  Such  are, 
for  instance,  the  absolute  coefficients  of  expansion  of  air, 


384  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

water,  and  mercury,  the  temperature  of  the  maximum 
density  of  water  (39°*ioi  Fahr.  or  4°*o  Cent.),  the  latent 
heats  of  water  and  steam,  the  boiling-point  of  water 
under  standard  pressure,  the  melting  and  boiling-points 
of  mercury,  and  so  on. 

Astronomical  Constants. 

The  third  great  class  consists  of  numbers  possessing  far 
less  generality  because  they  refer,  not  to  the  universal 
properties  of  matter,  but  to  the  special  forms  and  dis 
tances  in  which  matter  has  been  disposed  in  the  part  of 
the  universe  open  to  our  examination.  We  have,  first  of 
all,  to  define  the  magnitude  and  form  of  the  earth,  its  mean 
density,  the  constant  of  aberration  of  light  expressing  the 
relation  between  the  earth's  mean  velocity  in  space  and 
the  velocity  of  light.  From  the  earth,  as  our  observatory, 
we  then  proceed  to  lay  down  the  mean  distances  of  the 
sun,  and  of  the  planets  from  the  same  centre  ;  all  the 
elements  of  the  planetary  orbits,  the  magnitudes,  densities, 
masses,  periods  of  axial  rotation  of  the  several  planets 
are  by  degrees  determined  with  growing  accuracy.  The 
same  labours  must  be  gone  through  for  the  satellites. 
Catalogues  of  comets  with  the  elements  of  their  orbits, 
as  far  as  ascertainable,  must  not  be  omitted. 

From  the  earth's  orbit  as  a  new  base  of  observations, 
we  next  proceed  to  survey  the  heavens  and  lay  down  the 
apparent  positions,  magnitudes,  motions,  distances,  periods 
of  variation,  &c.  of  the  stars.  All  catalogues  of  stars  from 
those  of  Hipparchus  and  Tycho,  are  full  of  numbers  ex 
pressing  rudely  the  conformation  of  the  visible  universe. 
But  there  is  obviously  no  limit  to  the  labours  of  astrono 
mers  ;  not  only  are  minions  of  distant  stars  awaiting  their 
first  measurements,  but  those  already  registered  require 
endless  scrutiny  as  regards  their  movements  in  the  three 


UNITS  AND  STANDARDS  OF  MEASUREMENT.       385 

dimensions  of  space,  their  periods  of  revolution,  their 
changes  of  brilliancy  and  colours.  It  is  obvious  that 
though  astronomical  numbers  are  conventionally  called 
constant,  they  are  in  all  cases  probably  subject  to  more 
or  less  rapid  variation. 

Terrestrial  Numbers. 

Our  knowledge  of  the  globe  we  inhabit  involves  many 
numerical  determinations,  which  have  little  or  no  con 
nexion  with  astronomical  theory.  The  extreme  heights 
of  the  principal  mountains,  the  mean  elevation  of  con 
tinents,  the  mean  or  extreme  depths  of  the  oceans,  the 
specific  gravities  of  rocks,  the  temperature  of  mines,  all 
the  host  of  numbers  expressing  the  meteorological  or 
magnetic  conditions  of  every  part  of  the  surface  must 
fall  into  this  class.  Many  of  such  numbers  are  hardly 
to  be  called  constant,  being  subject  to  periodic  or  even 
secular  changes,  but  they  are  no  more  variable  in  fact 
than  many  which  in  astronomical  science  are  set  down 
as  constant.  In  many  cases  quantities  which  seem  most 
variable  may  go  through  rhythmical  changes  resulting 
in  a  nearly  uniform  average,  and  it  is  only  in  the  long 
progress  of  physical  investigation  that  we  can  hope  to 
discriminate  successfully  between  those  elemental  num 
bers  which  are  absolutely  fixed  and  those  which  vary. 
In  the  latter  case  the  law  of  variation  becomes  the 
constant  relation  which  is  the  object  of  our  search. 

Organic  Numbers. 

All  the  forms  and  properties  of  brute  nature  having 
been  sufficiently  defined  by  the  previous  classes  of  numbers, 
the  organic  world,  both  vegetable  and  animal,  remains 
outstanding,  and  offers  a  higher  series  of  phenomena  for 

c  c 


386  THE  PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

our  investigation.  All  exact  knowledge  relating  to  the 
forms  and  sizes  of  living  things,  their  numbers,  the 
quantities  of  various  compounds  which  they  consume, 
contain,  or  excrete,  their  muscular  or  nervous  energy,  &c. 
must  be  placed  apart  in  a  class  by  themselves.  All  such 
numbers  are  doubtless  more  or  less  subject  to  variation, 
and  but  in  a  minor  degree  capable  of  exact  determination. 
Man,  so  far  as  he  is  an  animal,  and  as  regards  his  physical 
form,  must  also  be  treated  in  this  class. 

Social  Numbers. 

Little  or  no  allusion  has  hitherto  been  made  in  this 
work  to  the  fact  that  man  in  his  economical,  sanitary, 
intellectual,  aesthetic,  or  moral  relations  may  become  the 
subject  of  exact  sciences,  the  highest  and  most  useful 
of  all  sciences.  Every  one  who  is  in  any  degree  engaged 
in  statistical  inquiry  or  study  must  so  far  acknowledge 
the  possibility  of  natural  laws  governing  such  statistical 
facts.  Hence  we  must  certainly  allot  a  distinct  place  to 
all  numerical  information  relating  to  the  numbers,  ages, 
physical  and  sanitary  condition,  mortality,  of  all  different 
peoples,  in  short,  to  vital  statistics.  Economic  statistics, 
comprehending  the  quantities  of  commodities  produced, 
existing,  exchanged,  and  consumed,  constitute  another 
most  extensive  body  of  science.  In  the  progress  of  reason 
exact  investigation  may  possibly  subdue  regions  of  pheno 
mena  which  at  present  defy  all  analysis  and  scientific 
treatment.  That  scientific  method  can  ever  exhaust  the 
phenomena  of  the  human  mind  is  on  the  other  hand  in 
credible. 


CHAPTER   XV. 

ANALYSIS    OF   QUANTITATIVE    PHENOMENA. 

IN  the  two  preceding  chapters  we  have  been  engaged 
in  considering  how  a  phenomenon  may  be  accurately 
measured  and  expressed.  So  delicate  and  complex  an 
operation  is  a  measurement  which  pretends  to  any  con 
siderable  degree  of  exactness,  that  no  small  part  of  the 
skill  and  patience  of  physicists  is  usually  spent  upon  this 
operation.  Much  of  this  difficulty  arises  from  the  fact  that 
it  is  scarcely  ever  possible  to  measure  one  simple  pheno 
menon  at  a  time.  The  ultimate  object  must  be  to  discover 
the  mathematical  equation  or  law  connecting  a  quantitative 
cause  with  its  quantitative  effect ;  this  purpose  usually 
involves,  as  we  shall  see,  the  varying  of  one  condition  at 
a  time,  the  other  conditions  being  maintained  constant. 
The  labours  of  the  experimentalist  would  be  comparatively 
light  if  he  could  carry  out  this  rule  of  varying  one  circum 
stance  at  a  time.  He  would  then  obtain  a  series  of  cor 
responding  values  of  the  variable  quantities  concerned, 
from  which  he  might  by  proper  hypothetical  treatment 
obtain  the  required  law  of  connexion.  But  in  reality 
it  is  seldom  possible  to  carry  out  this  direction  except 
in  an  approximate  manner.  Before  then  we  proceed  to 
the  consideration  of  the  actual  process  of  quantitative 
induction,  it  is  necessary  to  review  the  several  devices 
by  which  the  complication  of  effects  can  be  disentangled. 
Every  phenomenon  measured  will  usually  be  the  sum 
difference  or  product  of  two  or  more  different  effects, 
and  these  must  be  in  some  way  analysed  and  separately 

C  C   2 


388  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

measured    before  we    possess   the    materials   for    a    true 
inductive  treatment. 

Illustrations  of  the  Complication  of  Effects. 

It  is  easy  to  bring  forward  a  multitude  of  instances  to 
show  that  a  phenomenon  is  seldom  to  be  observed  simple 
and  alone.  A  more  or  less  elaborate  process  of  analysis 
is  almost  always  necessary.  Thus  if  an  experimentalist 
wishes  to  observe  and  measure  the  expansion  of  a  liquid 
by  heat,  he  places  it  in  a  thermometer  tube  and  registers 
the  rise  of  the  column  of  liquid  in  the  narrow  tube.  But 
he  cannot  heat  the  liquid  without  also  heating  the  glass, 
so  that  the  change  observed  is  really  the  difference  between 
the  expansions  of  the  liquid  and  the  glass.  More  minute 
investigation  will  show  the  necessity  perhaps  of  allowing 
for  further  effects,  namely  the  compression  of  the  liquid 
or  the  expansion  of  the  bulb  due  to  the  increased  pressure 
of  the  column  as  it  becomes  lengthened. 

In  a  great  many  cases  an  observed  effect  will  be  ap 
parently  at  least  the  simple  sum  of  two  separate  and 
independent  effects.  The  heat  evolved  in  the  combustion 
of  oil  is  partly  due  to  the  carbon  and  partly  to  the 
hydrogen.  A  measurement  of  the  heat  yielded  by  the  two 
jointly,  cannot  inform  us  how  much  proceeds  from  the 
one  and  how  much  from  the  other.  If  by  some  separate 
determination  we  can  ascertain  how  much  the  hydrogen 
yields,  then  by  mere  subtraction  we  learn  what  is  due 
to  the  carbon ;  and  vice  versa.  The  heat  conveyed  by  a 
liquid,  may  be  partly  conveyed  by  true  conduction,  partly 
by  convection.  The  light  dispersed  in  the  interior  of  a 
liquid  consists  both  of  what  is  reflected  by  floating 
particles  and  what  is  due  to  true  fluorescence51;  and -we 
must  find  some  mode  of  determining  one  portion  before 
we  can  learn  the  other. 

a  Stokes,  'Philosophical  Transactions'  (1852),  vol.  cxlii.  p.  529. 


ANALYSIS  OF  QUANTITATIVE  PHENOMENA.        389 

The  apparent  motion  of  the  spots  on  the  sun,  is  the 
algebraic  sum  of  the  sun's  axial  rotation,  and  of  the 
proper  motion  of  the  spots  upon  the  sun's  face ;  hence 
the  difficulty  of  ascertaining  by  direct  observations  the 
period  of  the  sun's  rotation. 

We  cannot  obtain  the  weight  of  a  portion  of  liquid 
in  a  chemical  balance  without  weighing  it  with  the 
containing  vessel.  Hence  to  have  the  real  weight  of 
the  liquid  operated  upon  in  an  experiment,  we  must 
have  a  separate  weighing  of  the  vessel,  with  or  without 
the  adhering  film  of  liquid  according  to  circumstances. 
This  is  likewise  the  mode  in  which  a  cart  and  its  load 
are  weighed  together,  the  tare  or  weight  of  the  cart 
previously  ascertained  being  deducted.  The  variation 
in  the  height  of  the  barometer  is  a  joint  effect,  partly 
due  to  the  real  variation  of  the  atmospheric  pressure, 
partly  due  to  the  expansion  of  the  mercurial  column  by 
heat.  The  effects  may  be  discriminated,  if,  instead  of 
one  barometer  tube  we  have  two  tubes  placed  closely 
side  by  side,  so  as  to  have  exactly  the  same  temperature. 
If  one  of  them  be  closed  at  the  bottom  so  as  to  be 
unaffected  by  the  atmospheric  pressure,  it  will  show 
the  changes  due  to  temperature  only,  and,  by  subtracting 
these  changes  from  those  shown  in  the  other  tube,  we 
get  the  real  oscillations  of  atmospheric  pressure.  But 
this  correction,  as  it  is  called,  of  the  barometric  reading, 
is  better  effected  by  calculation  from  the  readings  of 
an  ordinary  thermometer. 

In  a  great  many  other  cases  a  quantitative  effect  will  be 
the  difference  of  two  causes  acting  in  opposite  directions. 
The  late  Sir  John  Herschel  invented  an  instrument  like  a 

large  thermometer  which  he  called  the  Actinometer  b,  and 

, 

M.  Pouillet  constructed  a  somewhat   similar  instrument 
b  'Admiralty  Manual  of  Scientific    Enquiry,'    edited    by    Sir  John 
Herschel,  2nd  ed.  p.  299. 


390  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

called  the  Pyrheliometer,  for  ascertaining  the  heating 
power  of  the  sun's  rays.  In  both  instruments  the  heat 
of  the  sun  was  absorbed  by  a  reservoir  containing  water, 
and  the  rise  of  temperature  of  the  water  was  exactly 
observed,  either  by  its  own  expansion  or  by  the  readings 
of  a  delicate  thermometer  immersed  in  it.  The  details 
of  the  construction  and  use  of  these  instruments  are  im 
material  to  our  immediate  purpose.  Now  in  exposing  the 
actinometer  to  the  sun,  we  do  not  obtain  the  full  effect 
of  the  heat  absorbed,  because  the  receiving  surface  is  at 
the  same  time  radiating  heat  into  empty  space.  The 
observed  increment  of  temperature  is  in  short  the  dif 
ference  between  what  is  received  from  the  sun  and  lost  by 
radiation.  But  the  latter  quantity  is  capable  of  ready 
determination ;  we  have  only  to  shade  the  instrument 
from  the  direct  rays  of  the  sun,  while  leaving  it  exposed 
to  the  rest  of  the  open  sky,  and  we  can  observe  how 
much  it  cools  in  a  certain  time.  The  total  effect  of  the 
sun's  rays  will  obviously  be  the  apparent  effect  plus  the 
cooling  effect  in  an  equal  time.  By  alternate  exposure 
in  sun  and  shade  during  equal  intervals  the  desired  result 
may  be  obtained  with  considerable  accuracy  c. 

Two  quantitative  effects  were  beautifully  distinguished 
in  an  experiment  of  John  Canton,  devised  in  1761  for  the 
purpose  of  demonstrating  the  compressibility  of  water d. 
He  constructed  a  thermometer  with  a  large  bulb  full  of 
water  and  a  short  capillary  tube,  the  part  of  which  above 
the  water  was  freed  from  air.  Under  these  circumstances 
the  water  was  relieved  from  the  pressure  of  the  atmo 
sphere,  but  the  glass  bulb  in  bearing  that  pressure  was 
somewhat  contracted.  He  next  placed  the  instrument 
under  the  receiver  of  an  airpump,  and  on  exhausting  the 
air,  observed  the  water  sink  in  the  tube.  Having  thus 

c  Pouillet,  'Taylor's  Scientific  Memoirs/  vol.  iv.  p.  45. 
fl  Jamin,  '  Cours  de  Physique,'  vol.  i.  p.  158. 


ANALYSIS  OF  QUANTITATIVE  PHENOMENA.       391 

obtained  a  measure  of  the  effect  of  atmospheric  pressure 
on  the  bulb,  he  opened  the  top  of  the  thermometer  tube 
and  admitted  the  air.  The  level  of  the  water  now  sank 
still  more,  partly  from  the  pressure  on  the  bulb  being 
now  compensated,  and  partly  from  the  compression  of  the 
water  by  the  atmospheric  pressure.  It  is  obvious  that 
the  amount  of  the  latter  effect  was  approximately  the 
difference  of  the  two  observed  depressions. 

Not  uncommonly  indeed  the  actual  phenomenon  which 
we  wish  to  measure  is  considerably  less  than  various 
disturbing  effects  which  enter  into  the  question.  Thus 
the  compressibility  of  mercury  is  considerably  less  than 
the  expansion  of  the  vessels  in  which  it  is  measured 
under  pressure,  so  that  the  attention  of  the  experi 
mentalist  has  chiefly  to  be  concentrated  on  the  change 
of  magnitude  of  the  vessels.  Many  astronomical  phe 
nomena,  such  as  the  parallax  or  proper  motions  of  the 
fixed  stars,  are  far  less  than  the  instrumental  imper 
fections,  and  the  other  phenomena  of  precession,  nutation, 
aberration,  &c.  Even  Flamsteed  imagined  he  had  dis 
covered  the  parallax  of  the  pole  star6,  and  time  after 
time  astronomers  mistook  various  other  phenomena  for 
that  minute  motion  which  they  were  so  desirous  to 
discover. 

Methods  of  Eliminating  Error. 

In  any  particular  experiment  it  is  the  object  of  the 
experimentalist  to  measure  a  single  effect  only,  and  he 
endeavours  to  obtain  that  effect  free  from  any  interfering 
effects.  If  this  cannot  be,  as  it  seldom  or  never  can 
really  be,  he  makes  the  effect  as  considerable  as  possible 
compared  with  the  other  effects,  which  he  reduces  to  a 
minimum,  and  treats  as  noxious  errors.  Those  quantities, 

«•  Baily's  '  Account  of  the  Rev.  John  Flamsteed,'  p.  58. 


392  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

which  are  called  errors  in  one  case,  may  really  be  most 
important  and  interesting  phenomena  in  another  inves 
tigation.  When  we  speak  of  eliminating  error  we  really 
mean  disentangling  the  complicated  phenomena  of  nature. 
The  physicist  rightly  wishes  to  treat  one  thing  at  a  time, 
but  as  this  object  can  seldom  be  rigorously  carried  into 
practice,  he  has  to  seek  some  mode  of  counteracting  the 
tendency  to  error. 

The  general  principle  of  the  subject  is  that  a  single 
observation  can  render  known  only  a  single  quantity. 
Hence  if  several  different  quantitative  effects  are  known 
to  enter  into  any  investigation,  we  must  have  at  least 
as  many  distinct  results  of  observation  as  there  are 
quantities  to  be  determined.  Every  complete  experiment 
will  therefore  consist  in  general  of  several  operations. 
Guided  if  possible  by  previous  knowledge  of  the  causes 
in  action,  we  must  arrange  these  determinations,  so  that 
by  a  simple  mathematical  process  we  may  distinguish  the 
separate  quantities.  There  appear  to  be  five  principal 
methods  in  which  we  may  accomplish  this  object ;  these 
methods  are  specified  below  and  illustrated  in  the  suc 
ceeding  sections. 

(1)  The  Method  of  Avoidance.    The  physicist  may  seek 
for  some  special  mode  of  experiment   or  opportunity  of 
observation,  in  which  the  error  is  lion- existent  or  inap 
preciable. 

(2)  The  Differential  Method.  He  may  find  opportunities 
of  observation  when  all  interfering   phenomena    remain 
constant,  and  only  the  subject  of  observation  is  at  one  time 
present  and  another  time  absent ;    the  difference  between 
two  exact  observations  then  gives  its  amount. 

(3)  The  Method  of  Correction.     He  may  endeavour  to 
estimate  the  amount  of  the  interfering  force  by  the  best 
available  mode,  and  then  make  a  corresponding  correction 
in  the  results  of  observation. 


ANALYSIS  OF  QUANTITATIVE  PHENOMENA.       393 

(4)  The  Method  of  Compensation.  He  may  invent  some 
mode  of  neutralizing  the  interfering  force  by  balancing 
against  it  an  exactly  equal  and  opposite  force  of  unknown 
amount. 

(5)  The  Method  of  Reversal.     He  may  so  conduct  the 
experiment  that  the  interfering  force  may  act  in  opposite 
directions,  in  alternate  observations,  the  mean  result  being 
free  from  interference. 

1.    Method  of  Avoidance  of  Error. 

Astronomers  always  seek  opportunities  of  observation 
when  errors  will  have  the  smallest  effect.  In  spite  of 
elaborate  observations  and  long  continued  theoretical 
investigation,  it  is  not  found  possible  to  assign  any 
satisfactory  law  to  the  refractive  power  of  the  atmo 
sphere.  Although  the  apparent  change  of  place  of  a 
heavenly  body  thus  produced,  may  be  more  or  less 
accurately  calculated,  yet  the  error  depends  upon  the 
temperature  and  pressure  of  the  atmosphere,  and,  when 
a  ray  is  highly  inclined  to  the  perpendicular,  the  un 
certainty  in  the  refraction  becomes  very  considerable. 
Hence  astronomers  always  make  their  observations,  if 
possible,  when  the  object  is  at  the  highest  point  of  its 
daily  course,  i.e.  on  the  meridian.  In  some  kinds  of 
investigation,  as,  for  instance,  in  the  determination  of  the 
latitude  of  an  observatory,  the  astronomer  is  at  liberty 
to  select  one  or  more  stars  out  of  the  countless  number 
visible.  There  is  an  evident  advantage  in  such  a  case, 
in  selecting  a  star  which  passes  close  to  the  zenith, 
so  that  it  may  be  observed  almost  entirely  free  from 
atmospheric  refraction,  as  was  done  by  Hooke.  It 
was  ingeniously  suggested  by  Wallis  that  the  parallax 
of  the  fixed  stars  might  perhaps  be  detected  by  ob 
servations  of  the  greatest  azimuth  east  and  west  of  some 


394  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

circumpolar  star,  since  the  refractive  power  of  the  atmo 
sphere  which  affects  only  the  altitude  would  thus  be 
entirely  avoided  f. 

Astronomers  also  endeavour  to  render  their  clocks  as 
accurate  as  possible,  by  removing  the  source  of  variation. 
The  pendulum  is  perfectly  isochronous  so  long  as  its 
length  remains  invariable,  and  the  vibrations  are  exactly 
of  equal  length.  They  render  it  nearly  invariable  in 
length,  that  is  in  the  distance  between  the  centres  of 
suspension  and  oscillation,  by  a  compensatory  arrangement 
for  the  change  of  temperature.  But  as  this  compensation 
may  not  be  perfectly  accomplished,  some  astronomers 
place  their  chief  controlling  clocks  in  a  cellar,  or  other 
apartment,  where  the  changes  of  temperature  may  be  as 
slight  as  possible.  At  the  Paris  Observatory  a  clock  has 
been  placed  in  the  caves  beneath  the  building,  where 
there  is  no  appreciable  difference  between  the  summer 
and  winter  temperature. 

To  avoid  the  effect  of  unequal  oscillations  Huyghens 
made  his  beautiful  investigations,  which  resulted  in  the 
discovery  that  a  pendulum,  of  which  the  centre  of  oscil 
lation  moved  upon  a  cycloidal  path,  would  be  perfectly 
isochronous,  whatever  the  variation  in  the  length  of 
oscillations.  But  though  a  pendulum  may  be  rendered  in 
some  degree  cycloidal  by  the  use  of  a  steel  suspension 
spring,  it  is  found  that  the  mechanical  arrangements 
requisite  to  produce  a  truly  cycloidal  motion  introduce 
more  error  than  they  avoid.  Hence  astronomers  seek  to 
reduce  the  error  to  the  smallest  amount  by  maintaining 
their  clock  pendulums  in  uniform  movement  s ;  and  in 
fact  while  a  clock  is  in  good  order  and  has  the  same 
weights,  there  need  be  little  change  in  the  length  of 
oscillation. 

f  Grant,  '  History  of  Physical  Astronomy,'  p.  548. 

B  Montucla,  '  Histoire  des  Mathematiques/  vol.  ii.  p.  420. 


ANALYSIS  OF  QUANTITATIVE  PHENOMENA.       395 

When  a  pendulum  cannot  be  made  to  swing  uniformly, 
as  in  experiments  upon  the  force  of  gravity,  it  becomes 
requisite  to  resort  to  the  third  method,  and  a  correction 
is  introduced,  calculated  on  theoretical  grounds  from 
the  amount  of  the  observed  change  in  the  length  of 
vibration. 

It  has  been  mentioned  that  the  apparent  expansion 
of  a  liquid  by  heat,  when  contained  in  a  thermometer  tube 
or  other  vessel,  is  the  difference  between  the  real  ex 
pansion  of  the  liquid  and  that  of  the  containing  vessel.  The 
effects  can  be  accurately  distinguished  provided  that  we 
can  learn  the  real  expansion  by  heat  of  any  one  convenient 
liquid ;  for  by  observing  the  apparent  expansion  of  the 
same  liquid  in  any  required  vessel  we  can  by  difference 
learn  the  amount  of  expansion  of  the  vessel  due  to  any 
given  change  of  temperature.  When  we  once  know  the 
change  of  dimensions  of  the  vessel,  we  can  of  course- 
determine  the  absolute  expansion  of  any  other  liquid 
tested  in  it.  Thus  it  became  an  all-important  object  in 
scientific  research  to  measure  with  accuracy  the  absolute 
dilatation  by  heat  of  some  one  liquid,  and  mercury  owing 
to  several  circumstances  was  by  far  the  most  suitable. 
Dulong  and  Petit  devised  a  beautiful  mode  of  effecting 
this  by  simply  avoiding  altogether  the  effect  of  the 
change  of  size  of  the  vessel.  Two  upright  tubes  full  of 
mercury  were  connected  by  a  fine  tube  at  the  bottom, 
and  were  maintained  at  two  different  temperatures.  As 
mercury  was  free  to  flow  from  one  tube  to  the  other 
by  the  connecting  tube,  the  two  columns  necessarily 
exerted  equal  pressures  by  the  principles  of  hydrostatics. 
Hence  it  was  only  necessary  to  measure  very  accurately 
by  a  cathetometer  the  difference  of  level  of  the  surfaces 
of  the  two  columns  of  mercury,  to  learn  the  difference  of 
length  of  columns  of  equal  hydrostatic  pressure,  which  at 
once  gives  the  difference  of  density  of  the  mercury,  and 


396  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

the  dilatation  by  heat.  The  changes  of  dimension  in  the 
containing  tubes  now  became  a  matter  of  entire  indifference, 
and  the  length  of  a  column  of  mercury  at  different  tem 
peratures  was  measured  as  easily  as  if  it  had  formed  a 
solid  bar.  The  experiment  was  carried  out  by  Reguault 
with  many  improvements  of  detail,  and  the  absolute 
dilatation  of  mercury,  at  temperatures  between  o°  Cent, 
and  350°,  was  determined  almost  as  accurately  as  was 
needful11. 

The  presence  of  a  large  and  uncertain  amount  of  error 
may  often  render  a  method  of  experiment  valueless. 
Foucault's  beautiful  mode  of  demonstrating  the  rotation 
of  the  earth  by  the  motion  of  a  pendulum  was  thus 
frustrated.  The  slightest  lateral  disturbance  of  the 
pendulum  gave  it  an  elliptical  path  with  a  progressive 
motion  of  the  axis  of  the  ellipse,  and  this  motion  of  an 
•unknown  amount  disguised  and  overpowered  that  due 
to  the  rotation  of  the  earth1.  Faraday's  laborious  ex 
periments  on  the  relation  of  gravity  and  electricity  were 
much  obstructed,  too,  by  the  fact  that  it  is  almost  im 
possible  to  move  a  large  weight  of  iron  or  even  lead 
without  generating  currents  of  electricity,  either  by  friction 
or  induction.  To  distinguish  the  electricity  directly  due 
to  the  action  of  gravity  from  the  greater  quantities 
indirectly  produced  would  have  been  a  problem  of  ex 
cessive  difficulty.  Baily  in  his  experiments  on  the  density 
of -the  earth  was  aware  of  the  existence  of  inexplicable 
disturbances  which  have  since  been  referred  to  the  action 
of  electricity  with  much  probability k.  The  skill  and 
ingenuity  of  the  experimentalist  are  often  exhausted 
in  devising  a  form  of  apparatus  in  which  such  causes 
of  error  shall  be  reduced  to  a  minimum. 

11  Jamin,  '  Cours  de  Physique,'  vol.  ii.  pp.  15-28. 

i  'Philosophical  Magazine/  1851,  4th  Series,  vol.  ii.  passim. 

k  Hcarn,  '  Philosophical  Transactions,'  1847,  vol.  cxxxvii.  pp.  217-221. 


ANALYSIS  OF  QUANTITATIVE  PHENOMENA.        397 

In  some  rudimentary  experiments  we  may  wish  merely 
to  establish  the  existence  of  a  quantitative  effect  without 
precisely  measuring  its  amount ;  if  there  exist  causes  of 
error  of  which  we  can  neither  render  the  amount  known 
or  inappreciable,  the  best  way  will  be  to  make  them  all 
negative  so  that  the  quantitative  effects  will  be  less  than 
the  truth  rather  than  greater.  Mr.  Grove,  for  instance, 
in  proving  that  the  magnetization  or  demagnetization  of 
a  piece  of  iron  raises  its  temperature,  took  care  to  maintain 
the  electro-magnet  by  which  the  iron  was  acted  upon  at 
a  lower  temperature,  so  that  it  would  cool  rather  than 
warm  the  iron  by  radiation  or  conduction l. 

Rumford's  celebrated  experiment  to  prove  that  heat  was 
generated  out  of  mechanical  force  in  the  boring  of  a 
cannon  was  subject  to  the  difficulty  that  heat  might  be 
brought  to  the  cannon  by  conduction  from  neighbouring 
bodies.  It  was  an  ingenious  device  of  Davy  to  produce 
friction  by  a  piece  of  clock-work  resting  upon  a  block 
of  ice  in  an  exhausted  receiver ;  as  the  machine  rose  in 
temperature  above  32°,  it  was  certain  that  no  heat  was 
received  by  conduction  from  the  support111.  In  many 
other  experiments  ice  may  be  employed  to  prevent  the 
access  of  heat  by  conduction,  and  this  device,  first  put  in 
practice  by  Murray11,  is  beautifully  employed  in  Bunsen's 
calorimeter. 

To  obtain  the  true  temperature  of  the  air,  though 
apparently  so  easy,  is  really  a  very  difficult  matter, 
because  the  thermometer  employed  is  sure  to  be  affected 
either  by  the  sun's  rays,  the  radiation  from  neighbouring 
objects,  or  the  escape  of  heat  into  space.  These  sources 

1  '  The  Correlation  of  Physical  Forces,'  3rd  ed.  p.  159. 

m  'Collected  works  of  Sir  H.  Davy,'  vol.  ii.  pp.  12-14.  'Elements  of 
Chemical  Philosophy,'  p.  94. 

n  '  Nicholson's  Journal,' vol.  i.  p.  241;  quoted  in  'Treatise  on  Heat,' 
Useful  Knowledge  Society,  p.  24. 


398  THE   PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

of  error  are  too  fluctuating  to  allow  of  correction,  so  that 
the  only  accurate  mode  of  procedure  is  that  devised  by 
Dr.  Joule,  of  surrounding  the  thermometer  with  a  copper 
cylinder  ingeniously  adjusted  to  the  temperature  of  the 
air,  as  described  by  him,  so  that  the  effect  of  radiation 
shall  be  nullified  °. 

When  the  avoidance  of  error  cannot  be  carried  into 
effect,  it  will  yet  be  desirable  to  reduce  the  absolute 
amount  of  the  interfering  error  as  much  as  possible  before 
employing  the  succeeding  methods  to  correct  the  result. 
As  a  general  rule  we  can  determine  a  quantity  with  less 
inaccuracy  as  it  is  smaller,  so  that  if  the  error  itself  be 
small  the  error  in  determining  that  error  will  be  of  a  still 
lower  order  of  magnitude.  But  in  some  cases  the  absolute 
amount  of  an  error  is  of  no  consequence,  as  in  the  index 
error  of  a  divided  circle,  or  the  difference  between  a 
chronometer  and  astronomical  time.  Even  the  rate  at 
which  a  clock  gains  or  loses  is  a  matter  of  little  im 
portance  provided  it  remains  constant,  so  that  a  sure 
calculation  of  its  amount  can  be  made. 

2.   Differential  Method. 

When  we  cannot  avoid  the  entrance  of  error,  we  can 
often  resort  with  great  success  to  the  second  mode  of 
measuring  phenomena  under  such  circumstances  that  the 
error  shall  remain  nearly  or  quite  the  same  in  all  the 
observations,  and  neutralize  itself  as  regards  the  purposes 
in  view.  This  mode  is  available  whenever  we  want  a 
difference  between  quantities  and  not  the  absolute 
quantity  of  either.  The  determination  of  the  parallax 
of  the  fixed  stars  is  exceedingly  difficult,  because  the 
amount  of  paraUax  is  far  less  than  most  of  the  corrections 

0  Clerk  Maxwell,  'Theory  of   Heat,'   p.   228.     'Proceedings   of  the 
Manchester  Philosophical  Society,'  Nov.  26,  1867,  vol.  vii.  p.  35. 


ANALYSIS  OF  QUANTITATIVE  PHENOMENA.       399 

for  atmospheric  refraction,  nutation,  aberration,  pre 
cession,  instrumental  irregularities,  &c.,  and  can  with 
difficulty  be  detected  among  these  phenomena  of  various 
magnitude.  But,  as  Galileo  long  ago  suggested,  all 
such  difficulties  would  be  avoided  by  the  differential 
observation  of  stars,  which  though  apparently  close 
together  are  really  far  separated  on  the  line  of  sight. 
Two  such  stars  in  close  apparent  proximity  will  be  sub 
ject  to  almost  exactly  equal  errors,  so  that  all  we 
need  do  is  to  observe  the  apparent  change  of  place  of 
the  nearer  star  as  referred  to  the  more  distant  one. 
A  good  telescope  furnished  with  an  accurate  micrometer 
is  alone  needed  for  the  application  of  the  method. 
Huyghens  appears  to  have  been  the  first  observer  who 
actually  tried  to  employ  the  method  practically  P,  but 
it  was  not  until  1835  *na^  the  improvement  of  telescopes 
and  micrometers  enabled  Struve  to  detect  in  this  way 
the  parallax  of  the  star  a  Lyrse. 

It  is  one  of  the  many  advantages  of  the  observation 
of  transits  of  Venus  for  the  determination  of  the  solar 
parallax  that  the  refraction  of  the  atmosphere  affects 
in  an  exactly  equal  degree  the  planet  and  the  portion 
of  the  sun's  face  over  which  it  is  passing.  Thus  the 
observations  are  strictly  of  a  differential  nature. 

By  the  process  of  substitutive  weighing  it  is  possible 
to  ascertain  the  equality  or  inequality  of  two  weights 
with  almost  perfect  freedom  from  error.  If  two  weights 
A  and  B  be  placed  in  the  scales  of  the  best  balance 
we  cannot  be  sure  that  the  equilibrium  of  the  beam 
indicates  exact  equality,  because  the  arms  of  the  beam 
may  be  unequal  or  unbalanced.  But  if  we  take  B  out 
and  put  another  weight  C  in,  and  equilibrium  still 
exists,  it  is  apparent  that  the  same  causes  of  erroneous 

P  History  of  '  Physical  Astronomy,'  p.  549.  Herschel's  '  Outlines  of 
Astronomy/  4th  ed.  p.  550. 


400  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

weighing  exist  in  both  cases,  supposing  that  the  balance 
has  not  been  disarranged,  and  that  B  must  be  exactly 
equal  to  C,  since  it  has  exactly  the  same  effect  under 
the  same  circumstances.  In  like  manner  it  is  a  general 
rule  that,  if  by  any  uniform  mechanical  process  we  get 
a  copy  of  an  object,  it  is  unlikely  that  this  copy  will 
be  precisely  the  same  in  magnitude  and  form  as  the 
original,  but  two  copies  will  equally  diverge  from  the 
original,  and  will  therefore  almost  exactly  resemble  each 
other. 

Leslie's  Differential  Thermometer  <i  was  well  adapted 
to  the  experiments  for  which  it  was  invented.  Having 
two  equal  bulbs  any  alteration  in  the  temperature  of  the 
air  will  act  equally  by  conduction  on  each  and  produce 
no  change  in  the  indications  of  the  instrument.  Only 
that  radiant  heat  which  is  purposely  thrown  upon  one 
of  the  bulbs  will  produce  any  effect.  This  thermometer 
in  short  carries  out  the  principle  of  the  differential  method 
in  a  mechanical  manner. 


3.  Method  of  Correction. 

Whenever  the  result  of  an  experiment  is  affected  by  an 
interfering  cause  to  an  amount  either  invariable  or  exactly 
calculable,  it  is  sufficient  simply  to  add  or  subtract  this 
calculated  amount.  We  are  said  to  correct  observations 
when  we  thus  eliminate  what  is  due  to  extraneous  causes, 
although  of  course  we  are  only  separating  the  correct 
effects  of  several  agents.  Thus  the  variation  in  the  height 
of  the  barometrical  column  is  partly  due  to  the  change 
of  temperature,  and  since  the  coefficient  of  absolute 
dilatation  of  mercury  has  been  exactly  determined,  as 
already  described  (p.  395),  we  have  only  to  make  cal- 

(i  Leslie's  'Inquiry  into  the  Nature  of  Heat/  p.  10. 


ANALYSIS  OF  QUANTITATIVE  PHENOMENA.        401 

Culations  of  a  simple  character,  or,  what  is  better  still, 
tabulate  a  series  of  such  calculations  for  general  use, 
and  the  correction  for  temperature  can  be  made  with 
all  desired  accuracy.  The  height  of  the  mercury  in  the 
barometer  is  also  affected  by  capillary  attraction,  which 
depresses  it  by  a  constant  amount  depending  on  the 
diameter  of  the  tube.  The  requisite  corrections  can  be 
estimated  with  accuracy  sufficient  for  most  purposes,  more 
especially  as  we  can  check  the  correctness  of  the  reading 
of  a  barometer  by  comparison  with  a  perfect  standard 
barometer,  and  introduce  if  need  be  an  index  error 
including  both  the  error  in  the  affixing  of  the  scale 
and  the  effect  due  to  capillarity.  But  in  constructing 
the  standard  barometer  itself  we  must  take  greater  pre 
cautions  ;  the  capillary  depression  depends  somewhat 
upon  the  quality  of  the  glass,  the  absence  of  air,  and 
the  perfect  cleanliness  of  the  mercury,  so  that  we  cannot 
with  confidence  assign  the  exact  amount  of  the  effect. 
Hence  a  standard  barometer  is  constructed  with  a  wide 
tube,  sometimes  even  an  inch  in  diameter,  so  that  the 
capillary  effect  may  be  rendered  of  little  account1'. 
Gay  Lussac  made  barometers  in  the  form  of  a  siphon  so 
that  the  capillary  forces  acting  equally  at  the  upper  and 
lower  surfaces  should  balance  and  destroy  each  other, 
but  the  method  fails  in  practice  because  the  lower  surface, 
being  open  to  the  air,  becomes  sullied  and  subject  to  a 
different  force  of  capillarity. 

In  a  great  many  mechanical  experiments  friction  is 
an  interfering  condition,  and  drains  away  a  portion  of 
the  energy  intended  to  be  operated  upon  in  a  definite 
manner.  We  should  of  course  reduce  the  friction  in  the 
first  place  to  the  lowest  possible  amount,  but  as  it  cannot 
be  altogether  prevented,  and  is  not  calculable  with  cer 
tainty  from  any  general  laws,  we  must  determine  it 

r   "Watts'  '  Dictionary  of  Chemistry,'  vol.  i.  pp.  513-15- 
Dd 


402  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

separately  for  each  apparatus  by  suitable  experiments. 
Thus  Smeaton,  in  his  admirable  but  now  almost  forgotten 
researches  concerning  water-wheels,  eliminated  friction  in 
the  most  simple  manner  by  determining  by  trial  what 
weight,  acting  by  a  cord  and  roller  upon  his  model  water- 
wheel,  would  make  it  turn  without  water  as  rapidly  as 
the  water  made  it  turn.  In  short,  he  ascertained  what 
weight  concurring  with  the  water  would  exactly  com 
pensate  for  the  friction8.  In  Dr.  Joule's  experiments  to 
determine  the  mechanical  equivalent  of  heat  by  the  con 
densation  of  air,  a  considerable  amount  of  heat  was  pro 
duced  by  friction  of  the  condensing  pump,  and  a  small 
portion  by  stirring  the  water  employed  to  measure  the 
heat.  This  heat  of  friction  was  ascertained  by  simply 
repeating  the  experiment  in  an  exactly  similar  manner 
except  that  no  condensation  was  effected,  and  observing 
the  change  of  temperature  then  produced1. 

We  may  describe  as  test  experiments  any  in  which  we 
perform  operations  not  intended  to  give  the  quantity  of 
the  principal  phenomenon,  but  some  quantity  which  would 
otherwise  remain  as  an  error  in  the  result.  Thus  in 
astronomical  observations  almost  every  source  of  error 
may  be  avoided  by  increasing  the  number  of  observations 
and  distributing  them  in  such  a  manner  as  to  produce 
in  the  final  mean  as  much  error  in  one  way  as  in  the 
other.  But  there  is  one  source  of  error,  first  discovered 
by  Maskelyne,  which  cannot  be  avoided,  because  it  affects 
all  observations  in  the  same  direction  and  to  the  same 
average  amount,  namely  the  Personal  Error  of  the  ob 
server  or  the  inclination  to  record  the  passage  of  a  star 
across  the  wires  of  the  telescope  a  little  too  soon  or  a 
little  too  late.  This  personal  error  was  first  described  in 
the  'Edinburgh  Journal  of  Science/  vol.  i.  p.  178.  The 

8  '  Philosophical  Transactions,'  vol.  li.  p.  i  oo. 

t  'Philosophical  Magazine,'  3rd  Series,  vol.  xxvi.  p.  372. 


ANALYSIS  OF  QUANTITATIVE  PHENOMENA.       403 

difference  between  the  judgment  of  observers  at  the 
Greenwich  Observatory  usually  varies  from  ~0  to  J  of 
a  second,  or  even  a  little  more,  and  remains  pretty  con 
stant  for  the  same  observers u.  In  some  observers  it  has 
amounted  to  seven  or  eight-tenths  of  a  second x.  Do 
Morgan  appears  to  have  entertained  the  opinion  that 
this  source  of  error  was  essentially  incapable  of  elimina 
tion  or  correction  y.  But  it  seems  clear  that  this  personal 
error  might  be  determined  absolutely  with  any  desirable 
degree  of  accuracy  by  test  experiments,  consisting  in 
making  an  artificial  star  move  at  a  considerable  distance 
and  recording  by  electricity  the  exact  moment  of  its 
passage  over  the  wire.  This  method  has  in  fact  been 
successfully  employed  in  Leyden,  Paris,  and  Neuchatel z. 

Newton  employed  the  pendulum  for  making  experi 
ments  on  the  impact  of  balls.  Two  balls  were  hung  in 
contact,  and  one  of  them,  being  drawn  aside  through  a 
measured  arc,  was  then  allowed  to  strike  the  other,  the 
arcs  of  vibration  giving  sufficient  data  for  calculating  the 
distribution  of  energy  at  the  moment  of  impact.  The 
resistance  of  the  air  was  an  interfering;  cause  which  he 

o 

estimated  very  simply  by  causing  one  of  the  balls  to 
make  several  complete  vibrations  and  then  marking  the 
reduction  in  the  length  of  the  arcs,  a  proper  fraction 
of  which  reduction  was  added  to  each  of  the  other  ob 
served  arcs  of  vibration  a. 

In  the  modern  use  of  the  pendulum,  to  measure 
terrestrial  gravity,  it  is  not  found  convenient  to  annul 

u   'Greenwich  Observations  for  1866,'  p.  xlix. 

x  'Penny  Cyclopaedia,'  art.  Transit,  vol.  xxv.  pp.  129,  130. 

y    Ibid.  art.  Observation,  p.  390. 

z  'Nature,'  vol.  i.  pp.   85,   337.     See  references  to  the  Memoirs  de 
scribing  the  method, 

a  'Principia,'   Book   I.   Law  III.    Corollary   VI.  Scholium.      Motte's 
translation,  vol.  i.  p.  33. 

D  d  2 


THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 


the  resistance  of  the  air  by  operating  in  a  vacuum. 
Consequently  this  resistance  has  to  be  ascertained 
by  appropriate  and  tedious  series  of  experiments, 
which  should  be  made  if  possible  upon  each  pendulum 
employed. 

The  exact  definition  of  the  standard  of  length  is  one 
of  the  most  important,  as  it  is  one  of  the  most  difficult 
questions  in  physical  science,  and  the  different  practice  of 
different  nations  introduces  wholly  needless  confusion. 
Were  all  standards  constructed  so  as  to  give  the  true 
length  at  a  fixed  uniform  temperature,  for  instance  the 
freezing-point,  then  any  two  standards  could  be  compared 
without  the  interference  of  temperature  by  bringing  them 
both  to  exactly  the  same  fixed  temperature.  Unfortu 
nately  the  French  metre  is  defined  by  a  bar  of  platinum 
at  o°C,  while  our  yard  is  defined  by  a  bronze  bar  at  62°F. 
It  is  quite  impossible,  then,  to  make  a  comparison  of  the 
yard  and  metre  without  the  introduction  of  a  correction, 
either  for  the  expansion  of  platinum  or  bronze,  or  both. 
Bars  of  metal  differ  too  so  much  in  their  rates  of  expansion 
according  to  their  molecular  condition  that  it  is  dangerous 
to  infer  from  one  bar  to  another. 

When  we  come  to  use  instruments  with  great  accuracy 
there  are  many  minute  sources  of  error  which  must  be 
guarded  against.  If  a  thermometer  has  been  graduated 
when  perpendicular,  it  will  read  somewhat  differently 
when  laid  down,  as  the  pressure  of  a  column  of  mercury 
is  removed  from  the  bulb.  The  reading  may  also  be 
somewhat  altered  if  it  has  recently  been  raised  to  a 
higher  temperature  than  usual,  if  it  be  placed  under  a 
vacuous  receiver,  or  if  the  tube  be  unequally  heated  as  « 
compared  with  the  bulb.  For  these  minute  causes  of 
error  we  may  have  to  introduce  troublesome  corrections, 
unless  we  adopt  the  simple  mode  of  using  the  thermometer 
in  circumstances  of  position,  &c.  exactly  similar  to  those 


ANALYSIS  OF  QUANTITATIVE  PHENOMENA.       405 

in  which  it  was  graduated c.  There  is  no  end  to  the 
number  of  minute  corrections  which  may  ultimately  be 
required.  A  very  large  number  of  experiments  on  gases, 
standard  weights  and  measures,  &c.  depend  upon  the 
height  of  the  barometer  ;  but  when  experiments  in  dif 
ferent  parts  of  the  world  are  compared  together  we  ought 
to  take  into  account  the  varying  force  of  gravity,  which 
even  between  London  and  Paris  makes  a  difference  of 
•008  inch  of  mercury. 

The  measurement  of  quantities  of  heat  is  a  matter  of 
great  difficulty,  because  there  is  no  known  substance 
impervious  to  heat,  and  the  problem  is  therefore  as 
difficult  as  to  measure  liquids  in  porous  vessels.  To 
determine  the  latent  heat  of  steam  we  must  condense  a 
certain  amount  of  the  steam  in  a  known  weight  of  water, 
and  then  observe  the  rise  of  temperature  of  the  water. 
But  while  we  are  carrying  out  the  experiment,  part  of  the 
heat  will  have  escaped  by  radiation  or  conduction  from 
the  condensing  vessel  or  calorimeter.  We  may  indeed 
reduce  the  loss  of  heat  by  using  vessels  with  double  sides 
and  bright  surfaces,  surrounded  with  swan's-down  wool  or 
other  non-conducting  materials  ;  and  we  may  also  avoid 
raising  the  temperature  of  the  water  much  above  that  of 
the  surrounding  air.  Yet  we  cannot  by  any  such  means 
render  the  loss  of  heat  inconsiderable.  Eumford  ingeni 
ously  proposed  to  reduce  the  loss  to  zero  by  commencing 
the  experiment  when  the  temperature  of  the  calorimeter 
is  as  much  below  that  of  the  air  as  it  is  at  the  end  of  the 
experiment  above  it.  Thus  the  vessel  will  first  gain  and 
then  lose  by  radiation  and  conduction,  and  these  opposite 
errors  will  approximately  balance  each  other.  But  Reg- 
nault  has  shown  that  the  loss  and  gain  do  not  proceed  by 
exactly  the  same  laws,  so  that  in  very  accurate  inves 
tigations  Kumford's  method  is  not  sufficient.  There 

c  Balfour  Stewart,  '  Elementary  Treatise  on  Heat/  p.  16. 


406  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 


remains  the  method  of  correction  which  was  beautifully 
carried  out  by  Regnault  in  his  determination  of  the  latent 
heat  of  steam,  He  employed  two  calorimeters,  made  in 
exactly  the  same  way  and  alternately  used  to  condense  a 
certain  amount  of  steam,  so  that  while  one  was  measuring 
the  latent  heat,  the  other  calorimeter  was  engaged  in 
determining  the  corrections  to  be  applied,  whether  on 
account  of  radiation  and  conduction  from  the  vessel  or 
on  account  of  heat  reaching  the  vessel  by  means  of  the 
connecting  pipes  d. 

4.  Method  of  Compensation. 

There  are  many  cases  in  which  a  cause  of  error  cannot 
conveniently  be  rendered  null,  and  is  yet  beyond  the 
reach  of  the  third  method,  that  of  calculating  the  requisite 
correction  from  independent  observations.  The  magnitude 
of  an  error  may  be  subject  to  continual  variations,  on 
account  of  change  of  weather,  or  other  fickle  circumstances 
beyond  our  control.  It  may  either  be  impracticable  to 
observe  the  variation  of  those  circumstances  in  sufficient 
detail,  or,  if  observed,  the  calculation  of  the  amount  of 
error  may  be  subject  to  doubt.  In  these  cases,  and  only 
in  these  cases,  it  will  be  desirable  to  invent  some  artificial 
mode  of  counterpoising  the  variable  error  against  an  equal 
error  subject  to  exactly  the  same  variation. 

We  cannot  weigh  any  object  with  great  accuracy  unless 
we  make  a  correction  for  the  weight  of  the  air  displaced 
by  the  object,  and  add  this  to  the  apparent  weight.  In 
very  accurate  investigations  relating  to  standard  weights, 
it  is  usual  to  note  the  barometer  and  thermometer  at  the 
time  of  making  a  weighing,  and,  from  the  measured  bulks 
of  the  objects  compared,  to  calculate  the  weight  of  air 

d  Graham's  '  Chemical  Reports  and  Memoirs/  Cavendish  Society,  pp. 
247,  268,  &c. 


ANALYSIS  OF  QUANTITATIVE  PHENOMENA.      407 

displaced  ;  the  third  method  in  fact  is  adopted.  To  make 
all  the  calculations  in  the  frequent  weighings  requisite  in 
chemical  analysis  would  be  exceedingly  laborious,  hence 
the  correction  is  usually  neglected.  But  when  the  chemist 
wishes  to  weigh  a  quantity  of  gas  contained  in  a  glass 
globe  for  the  purpose  of  determining  its  specific  gravity, 
the  correction  becomes  of  much  importance.  Hence 
chemists  avoid  at  once  the  error,  and  the  labour  of  cor 
recting  it,  by  attaching  to  the  opposite  scale  of  the  balance 
a  sealed  glass  globe  of  exactly  equal  capacity  to  that 
containing  the  gas  to  be  weighed,  noting  only  the  dif 
ference  of  weight  when  the  globe  is  full  and  empty.  The 
correction,  being  exactly  the  same  for  both  globes,  may  be 
entirely  neglected e. 

A  device  of  nearly  the  same  kind  is  employed  in  the 
construction  of  galvanometers  which  measure  the  force  of 
an  electric  current  by  the  deflection  of  a  suspended 
magnetic  needle.  The  resistance  of  the  needle  is  partly 
due  to  the  directive  influence  of  the  earth's  magnetism, 
and  partly  to  the  torsion  of  the  thread.  But  the  former 
force  may  often  be  inconveniently  great  as  well  as 
troublesome  to  determine  for  different  inclinations.  Hence 
it  is  customary  to  connect  together  two  exactly  equal 
needles,  with  their  poles  pointing  in  opposite  directions, 
one  needle  being  within  and  another  without  the  coil  of 
wire.  As  regards  the  earth's  magnetism,  the  needles  are 
now  astatic  or  indifferent,  the  tendency  of  one  needle 
being  exactly  balanced  by  that  of  the  other. 

An  elegant  instance  of  the  elimination  of  a  disturbing 
force  by  compensation  is  found  in  Faraday's  researches 
upon  the  magnetism  of  gases.  To  observe  the  magnetic 
attraction  or  repulsion  of  a  gas  seems  impossible  unless  we 
enclose  the  gas  in  an  envelope,  probably  best  made  of 

c  Rcgnault's  '  Cours  Elementaire  dc  Ohimie,'  1851,  vol.  i.  p.  141. 


408  THE  PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

glass.  But  any  such  envelope  is  sure  to  be  more  or  less 
affected  by  the  magnet,  so  that  it  becomes  difficult  to 
distinguish  between  three  forces  which  enter  the  problem  ; 
namely,  the  magnetism  of  the  gas  in  question,  that  of  the 
envelope,  and  that  of  the  surrounding  atmospheric  air. 
Faraday  avoided  all  difficulties  by  employing  two  exactly 
equal  and  similar  glass  tubes  connected  together,  and  so 
suspended  from  the  arm  of  a  torsion  balance  that  the 
tubes  were  in  similar  parts  of  the  magnetic  field.  One 
tube  being  filled  with  nitrogen  and  the  other  with  oxygen, 
it  was  found  that  the  oxygen  seemed  to  be  attracted  and 
the  nitrogen  repelled.  The  suspending  thread  of  the 
balance  was  then  turned  until  the  force  of  torsion  restored 
the  tubes  to  their  original  places,  where  the  magnetism  of 
the  tubes  as  well  as  that  of  the  surrounding  air,  being 
exactly  the  same  and  in  the  opposite  direction  upon  the 
two  tubes,  could  not  produce  any  interference.  The  force 
thus  required  to  restore  the  tubes  was  measured  by  the 
amount  of  torsion  of  the  thread,  and  it  indicated  correctly 
the  comparative  attractive  powers  of  oxygen  and  nitrogen. 
The  oxygen  was  then  withdrawn  from  one  of  the  tubes, 
and  a  second  experiment  made,  so  as  to  compare  a  vacuum 
with  nitrogen.  No  force  was  now  required  to  maintain 
the  tubes  in  their  places,  so  that  nitrogen  was  found  to 
be,  approximately  speaking,  indifferent  to  the  magnet, 
that  is,  neither  magnetic  nor  diamagnetic,  while  oxygen 
was  proved  to  be  positively  magnetic f.  It  required  the 
highest  experimental  skill  on  the  part  of  Faraday  and 
Tyndall,  to  distinguish  between  what  is  apparent  and  real 
in  magnetic  attraction  and  repulsion. 

Experience  alone  can  absolutely  decide  when  a  com 
pensating  arrangement  is  conducive  to  accuracy.  As  a 
general  rule  mechanical  compensation  is  the  last  resource, 

f  Tyndall's  'Faraday/  pp.  114-15. 


ANALYSIS  OF  QUANTITATIVE  PHENOMENA.       409 

and  in  the  more  accurate  observations  it  is  likely  to 
introduce  more  uncertainty  than  it  removes.  A  multitude 
of  instruments  involving  mechanical  compensation  have 
been  devised,  but  they  are  usually  of  an  unscientific 
character  £,  because  the  errors  compensated  can  be  more 
accurately  determined  and  allowed  for.  But  there  are 
exceptions  to  this  rule,  and  it  seems  to  be  proved  that  in 
the  delicate  and  tiresome  operation  of  measuring  a  base 
line,  invariable  bars,  compensated  for  expansion  by  heat, 
give  a  very  accurate  result,  the  observation  of  their  vary 
ing  temperature  and  the  calculation  of  the  corrections 
being  an  uncertain  and  tedious  work  h. 

O 

We  thus  see  that  the  choice  of  one  or  other  mode  of 
eliminating  a  simple  error  depends  entirely  upon  circum 
stances  and  the  object  in  view ;  but  we  may  safely  lay 
down  the  following  conclusions.  First  of  all,  seek  to  avoid 
the  source  of  error  altogether  if  it  can  be  conveniently 
done  ;  if  not,  make  the  experiment  so  that  the  error  may 
be  as  small,  but  more  especially  as  constant,  as  possible. 
If  the  means  are  at  hand  for  determining  its  amount 
by  calculation  from  other  experiments  and  principles 
of  science,  allow  the  error  to  exist  and  make  a  correction 
in  the  result.  If  this  cannot  be  accurately  done  or  in 
volves  too  much  labour  for  the  purposes  in  view,  then 
throw  in  a  counteracting  error  which  shall  as  nearly  as 
possible  be  of  equal  amount  in  all  circumstances  with 
that  to  be  eliminated.  There  yet  remains,  however,  one 
important  method,  that  of  Reversal,  which  will  form  an 
appropriate  transition  to  the  succeeding  chapters  on  the 
Method  of  Mean  Results  and  the  Law  of  Error. 

s  See,  for  instance,  the  Compensated  Sympiesometer,  '  Philosophical 
Magazine,'  4th  Series,  vol.  xxxix.  p.  371. 

h  Grant,  '  History  of  Physical  Astronomy,'  pp.  146,  147. 


THE   PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 


5.   Method  of  Reversal. 

The  fifth  method  of  eliminating  error  is  most  potent 
and  satisfactory  whenever  it  can  be  applied,  but  it  re 
quires  that  we  shall  be  able  to  reverse  the  apparatus  and 
mode  of  procedure,  so  as  to  make  the  interfering  cause 
act  alternately  in  opposite  directions.  If  we  can  get  two 
experimental  results,  one  of  which  is  as  much  too  great  as 
the  other  is  too  small,  the  error  is  equal  to  half  the  dif 
ference,  and  the  true  result  is  the  mean  of  the  two 
apparent  results.  It  is  an  unavoidable  defect  of  the 
chemical  balance,  for  instance,  that  the  points  of  sus 
pension  of  the  pans  cannot  be  fixed  at  exactly  equal 
distances  from  the  centre  of  suspension  of  the  beam. 
Hence  two  weights  which  seem  to  balance  each  other 
will  never  be  quite  equal  in  reality.  The  difference  is 
detected  by  reversing  the  weights,  and  it  may  be  esti 
mated  by  adding  sufficient  small  weights  to  the  deficient 
side  to  restore  equilibrium,  and  then  taking  as  the  true 
weight  the  geometric  mean  of  the  two  apparent  weights 
of  the  same  object.  If  the  difference  is  small  the  arith 
metic  mean,  that  is  half  the  sum,  may  be  substituted  for 
the  geometric  mean,  from  which  it  will  not  appreciably 
differ. 

This  method  of  reversal  is  most  extensively  employed 
in  practical  astronomy.  The  apparent  elevation  of  a 
heavenly  body  is  observed  by  a  telescope  moving  upon 
a  divided  circle,  upon  which  the  inclination  of  the 
telescope  is  read  off.  Now  this  reading  will  be  erroneous 
if  the  circle  and  the  telescope  have  not  accurately  the 
same  centre.  But  if  we  read  off  at  the  same  time  both 
ends  of  the  telescope,  the  one  reading  will  be  about  as 
much  too  small  as  the  other  is  too  great,  and  the  mean 
will  be  nearly  free  from  error.  In  practice  the  observa- 


ANALYSIS  OF  QUANTITATIVE  PHENOMENA.        411 

tion  is  differently  conducted,  but  the  principle  is  the 
same ;  the  telescope  is  fixed  to  the  circle,  which  moves 
with  it,  and"  the  angle  through  which  it  moves  is  read 
off  at  three,  six,  or  more  points,  disposed  of  at  equal 
intervals  round  the  circle.  The  older  astronomers,  down 
even  to  the  time  of  Flamsteed,  were  accustomed  to  use 
portions  only  of  a  divided  circle,  generally  quadrants,  and 
Homer  made  a  vast  improvement  when  he  introduced 
the  complete  circle. 

The  transit  circle,  employed  to  determine  the  meridian 
passage  of  heavenly  bodies,  is  so  constructed  that  the 
telescope  and  the  axis  bearing  it,  in  fact  the  whole  moving 
part  of  the  instrument,  can  be  taken  out  of  the  bearing 
sockets  and  turned  over,  so  that  what  was  formerly  the 
western  pivot  becomes  the  eastern  one,  and  vice,  versd. 
It  is  impossible  that  the  instrument  could  have  been 
so  perfectly  constructed,  mounted,  and  adjusted  that  the 
telescope  should  point  exactly  to  the  meridian,  but  the 
effect  of  the  reversal  is  that  it  will  point  as  much  to 
the  west  in  one  position  as  it  does  to  the  east  in  the 
other,  and  the  mean  result  of  observations  in  the  two 
positions  must  be  free  from  such  cause  of  error. 

The  accuracy  with  which  the  inclination  of  the  compass 
needle  can  be  determined  depends  almost  entirely  on  the 
method  of  reversal.  The  dip  needle  consists  of  a  bar 
of  magnetized  steel,  suspended  like  the  beam  of  a  delicate 
balance  on  a  slender  axis  passing  through  the  centre  of 
gravity  of  the  bar,  so  that  it  is  at  liberty  to  rest  in  that 
exact  degree  of  inclination  in  the  magnetic  meridian 
which  the  magnetism  of  the  earth  induces.  The  in 
clination  is  read  off  upon  a  vertical  divided  circle,  but 
to  avoid  any  error  in  the  centring  of  the  needle  and 
circle,  both  ends  are  read,  and  the  mean  of  the  results 
is  taken.  The  whole  instrument  is  now  turned  carefully 
round  through  180°,  which  gives  two  new  readings,  in 


412  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

which  any  error  due  to  the  wrong  position  of  the  zero 
of  the  division  will  be  reversed.  As  the  axis  of  the 
needle  may  not  be  exactly  horizontal,  it  is  now  reversed 
in  the  same  manner  as  the  transit  instrument,  the  end  of 
the  axis  which  formerly  pointed  east  being  made  to  point 
west,  and  a  new  set  of  readings  is  taken. 

Finally,  error  may  arise  from  the  axis  not  passing 
accurately  through  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  bar,  and 
this  error  can  only  be  detected  and  eliminated  on  re 
versing  the  magnetic  poles  of  the  bar  by  the  application 
of  a  strong  magnet.  The  error  is  thus  made  to  act  in 
opposite  directions.  To  ensure  all  possible  accuracy  each 
reversal  ought  to  be  combined  with  each  other  reversal, 
so  that  the  needle  will  be  observed  in  eight  different 
positions  by  sixteen  different  readings,  the  mean  of  the 
whole  of  which  will  give  the  required  inclination  free 
from  all  eliminable  errors  k. 

There  are  certain  cases  of  experiment  in  which  a 
disturbing  cause  can  with  much  ease  be  made  to  act  in 
opposite  directions,  in  alternate  observations,  so  that  the 
mean  of  the  results  will  be  free  from  disturbance.  Thus 
in  direct  experiments  upon  the  velocity  of  sound  in 
passing  through  the  air  between  stations  two  or  three 
miles  apart,  the  wind  is  a  cause  of  error.  It  will  be  well, 
in  the  first  place,  to  choose  a  time  for  the  experiment 
when  the  air  is  very  nearly  at  rest,  and  the  disturbance 
slight,  but  if  at  the  same  moment  signal  sounds  be  made 
at  each  station  and  observed  at  the  other,  two  sounds  will 
be  passing  in  opposite  directions  through  the  same  body 
of  air  and  the  wind  will  accelerate  one  sound  almost 
exactly  as  much  as  it  retards  the  other1.  Again,  in 
trigonometrical  surveys  the  apparent  height  of  a  point 

k  Quetelet,  '  Sur  la  Physique  du  Globe,'  p.  174.  Jamin,  '  Cours  de 
Physique,'  vol.  i.  p.  504. 

1  Herschel,  On  Sound,  '  Encyclopaedia  Metropolitana,'  p.  748. 


ANALYSIS  OF  QUANTITATIVE  PHENOMENA.        413 

will  be  affected  by  atmospheric  refraction  and  the 
curvature  of  the  earth.  But  if  in  the  case  of  two  points 
the  apparent  elevation  of  each  as  seen  from  the  other  be 
observed,  the  corrections  will  be  the  same  in  amount,  but 
reversed  in  direction,  and  the  mean  between  the  two 
apparent  differences  of  altitude  will  give  the  true  dif 
ference  of  level  m. 

In  the  next  two  chapters  we  really  pursue  the  Method 
of  Reversal  into  more  complicated  applications. 

111  Hutton,  'Philosophical  Transactions/  abridgment,  vol.  xiv.  p.  422. 


CHAPTER    XVI. 


THE    METHOD    OF    MEANS. 

ALL  results  of  the  measurement  of  continuous  quantity 
can  only  be  approximately  true.  Were  this  assertion 
doubted,  it  could  readily  be  proved  by  direct  experience. 
For  if  any  person,  using  an  instrument  of  the  greatest 
precision,  makes  and  registers  successive  observations  in 
an  unbiassed  manner,  it  will  almost  invariably  be  found 
that  the  results  differ  from  each  other.  When  we  operate 
with  sufficient  care  we  cannot  perform  so  simple  an 
experiment  as  weighing  an  object  in  a  good  balance 
without  getting  discrepant  numbers.  Only  the  rough 
and  careless  experimenter  will  think  that  his  observations 
agree,  but  in  reality  he  will  be  found  to  overlook  the 
differences.  The  most  elaborate  researches,  such  as  those 
undertaken  in  connexion  with  standard  weights  and 
measures,  always  render  it  apparent  that  complete  coinci 
dence  is  out  of  the  question,  and  that  the  more  accurate 
our  modes  of  observation  are  rendered,  the  more  numerous 
are  the  sources  of  minute  error  which  become  apparent. 
We  may  look  upon  the  existence  of  error  in  all  measure 
ments  as  the  normal  state  of  things.  It  is  absolutely 
impossible  to  eliminate  separately  the  multitude  of  small 
disturbing  influences,  except  by  balancing  them  off  against 
each  other.  And  even  in  drawing  a  mean  it  is  to  be 
expected  that  we  shall  come  near  the  truth  rather  than 
exactly  to  it.  In  the  measurement  of  continuous  quantity, 


THE  METHOD  OF  MEANS.  415 

absolute  coincidence,  if  it  even  occurs  or  seems  to  occur, 
must  be  purely  casual,  and  is  no  indication  of  precision.  It 
is  one  of  the  most  embarrassing  things  we  can  meet  when 
experimental  results  agree  too  closely.  Such  coincidences 
should  raise  our  suspicion  that  the  apparatus  in  use  is  in 
some  way  restricted  in  its  operation,  so  as  not  really  to 
give  the  true  result  at  alla,  or  that  the  actual  results  have 
not  been  faithfully  recorded  by  the  assistant  in  charge  of 
the  apparatus. 

If  then  we  cannot  get  twice  over  exactly  the  same 
result,  the  question  arises,  How  can  we  ever  attain  the 
truth  or  select  the  result  which  may  be  supposed  to 
approach  most  nearly  to  it "?  The  quantity  of  a  certain 
phenomenon  is  expressed  in  several  numbers  which  differ 
from  each  other ;  no  more  than  one  of  them  at  the  most 
can  be  true,  and  it  is  more  probable  that  they  are  all 
false.  It  may  be  suggested,  perhaps,  that  the  observer 
should  select  the  one  observation  which  he  judged  to  be 
the  best  made,  and  there  will  often  doubtless  be  a  feeling 
that  one  or  more  results  were  satisfactory,  and  the  others 
less  trustworthy.  This  seems  to  have  been  the  course 
adopted  by  some  of  the  early  astronomers.  Flamsteed 
when  lie  had  made  several  observations  of  a  star  probably 
chose  in  an  arbitrary  manner  that  which  seemed  to  him 
nearest  to  the  truth1'. 

When  Horrocks  selects  for  his  estimate  of  the  sun's 
semidiameter  a  mean  between  the  results  of  Kepler  and 
Tycho  he  professes  not  to  do  it  from  any  regard  to  the 
idle  adage,  '  Medio  tutissimus  ibis,'  but  because  he 
thought  it  from  his  own  observations  to  be  correct c.  But 
this  method  will  not  apply  at  all  when  the  observer  has 

lv  Thomson  and  Tait,  'Treatise  on  Natural  Philosophy,'  vol.  i.  p.  309. 
b  Baily's  'Account  of  Flamsteed,'  p.  376. 

c  'The  Transit  of  Venus  across  the  Sun,'  by  Horrocks,  London,  1859, 
p.  146. 


416  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

made  a  number  of  measurements  which  are  equally  good 
in  his  opinion,  and  it  is  quite  apparent  that  in  using  an 
instrument  or  apparatus  of  considerable  complication  the 
observer  will  not  necessarily  be  able  to  judge  whether 
slight  causes  have  affected  its  operation  or  not. 

In  this  question,  as  indeed  throughout  inductive  logic, 
we  deal  only  with  probabilities.  There  is  no  infallible 
mode  of  arriving  at  the  absolute  truth,  which  lies  beyond 
the  reach  of  human  intellect,  and  can  only  be  the  distant 
object  of  our  long  continued  and  painful  approximations. 
Nevertheless  there  is  a  mode  pointed  out  alike  by  common 
sense  and  the  highest  mathematical  reasoning,  which  is 
more  likely  than  any  other,  as  a  general  rule,  to  bring  us 
near  the  truth.  The  apia-rov  /merpoi',  or  the  aurea  mediocritas, 
was  highly  esteemed  in  the  ancient  philosophy  of  Greece 
and  Rome  ;  but  it  is  not  probable  that  any  of  the  ancients 
should  have  been  able  clearly  to  analyse  and  express  the 
reasons  why  they  advocated  the  mean  as  the  safest  course. 
But  in  the  last  two  centuries  this  apparently  simple 
question  of  the  mean  has  been  found  to  afford  a  field  for 
the  exercise  of  the  utmost  mathematical  skill.  Roger 
Cotes,  the  editor  of  the  '  Principia/  appears  to  have  had 
some  insight  into  the  value  of  the  mean  ;  but  profound 
mathematicians  such  as  De  Moivre,  Daniel  Bernoulli  i,  La 
place,  Lagrange,  Gauss,  Quetelet,  De  Morgan,  Airy,  Leslie, 
Ellis  and  others  have  hardly  exhausted  the  subject. 

Several  uses  of  the  Mean  Result. 

The  elimination  of  errors  of  unknown  sources,  is  almost 
always  accomplished  by  the  simple  arithmetical  process 
of  taking  the  mean,  or,  as  it  is  often  called,  the  average 
of  several  discrepant  numbers.  To  take  an  average  is  to 
add  the  several  quantities  together,  and  divide  by  the 
number  of  quantities  thus  added,  which  gives  a  quotient 


THE   METHOD   OF  MEANS.  417 


lying  among,  or  in  the  middle  of,  the  several  quantities. 
Before  however  inquiring  fully  into  the  grounds  of  this 
procedure,  it  is  essential  to  observe  that  this  one  arith 
metical  process  is  really  applied  in  at  least  three  different 
cases,  for  different  purposes,  and  upon  different  principles, 
and  we  must  take  great  care  not  to  confuse  one  applica 
tion  of  the  process  with  another.  A  mean  result,  then, 
may  have  any  one  of  the  following  significations. 

(1)  It   may   give    a    merely   representative    number, 
expressing  the  general  magnitude  of  a  series  of  quantities, 
and  serving  as  a  convenient   mode    of  comparing   them 
with  other  series  of  quantities.    Such  a  number  is  properly 
called  The  fictitious  mean  or  The  average  result. 

(2)  It-  may    give   a   result   approximately   free   from 
disturbing  quantities,  which  are  known   to   affect  some 
results  in  one  direction,  and  other  results  equally  in  the 
opposite  direction.     We  may  say  that  in  this  case  we  get 

-a  Precise  mean  result. 

(3)  It  may  give  a  result  more  or  less  free  from  unknown 
and   uncertain   errors ;    this  we  may  call  the  Probable 
mean  result. 

Of  these  three  uses  of  the  mean  the  first  is  entirely  dif 
ferent  in  nature  from  the  two  last,  since  it  does  not  yield 
an  approximation  to  any  natural  quantity,  but  furnishes 
us  with  an  arithmetic  result  comparing  the  aggregate  of 
certain  quantities  with  their  number.  The  third  use  of 
the  mean  rests  entirely  upon  the  theory  of  probability, 
and  will  be  more  fully  considered  in  a  later  part  of  this 
,  chapter.  The  second  use  is  closely  connected,  or  even 
identical  with,  the  Method  of  Reversal  already  described 
(p.  410),  but  it  will  be  convenient  to  enter  somewhat  fully 
on  all  the  three  employments  of  the  same  arithmetical 
process. 


E  e 


418  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

The  significations  of  the  terms  Mean 
and  Average. 

Much  confusion  exists  in  the  popular,  or  even  the 
scientific  employment  of  the  terms  mean  and  average,  and 
they  are  commonly  taken  as  synonymous.  It  is  desirable 
to  ascertain  carefully  what  significations  we  ought  to 
attach  to  them.  The  English  word  mean  is  exactly  equi 
valent  to  medium,  being  derived  perhaps,  through  the 
French  moyen,  from  the  latin  medius,  which  again  is  un 
doubtedly  kindred  with  the  Greek  /zeo-o?.  Etymologists 
believe,  too,  that  this  Greek  word  is  connected  with  the 
preposition  /xera,  the  German  mitte,  and  the  true  English 
mid  or  middle  ;  so  that  after  all  the  mean  is  a  technical 
term  identical  in  its  root  with  the  more  popular  equivalent 
middle. 

If  we  inquire  what  is  a  mean  in  a  mathematical  point 
of  view,  the  true  answer  is  that  there  are  several  or  many 
kinds  of  means.  The  old  arithmeticians  recognised  at 
least  ten  kinds,  which  are  stated  by  Boethius,  and  even 
an  eleventh  was  added  by  Jordanusd. 

The  arithmetic  mean  is  the  one  by  far  the  most 
commonly  denoted  by  the  term,  and  that  which  we  may 
understand  it  to  signify  in  the  absence  of  any  qualification. 
It  is  the  sum  of  any  series  of  quantities  divided  by  their 
number,  and  may  be  represented  by  the  formula  J  (a  +  ~b). 
But  there  is  also  the  geometric  mean,  which  is  the  square 
root  of  the  product,,  *Ja^xb,  or  that  quantity  the  logar 
ithm  of  which  is  the  arithmetic  mean  of  the  logarithms 
of  the  quantities.  There  is  also  the  harmonic  mean, 
which  is  the  reciprocal  of  the  arithmetic  mean  of  the 
reciprocals  of  the  quantities.  Thus  if  a  and  I  be  the 

d  De  Morgan,  Supplement  to  the  '  Penny  Cyclopaedia,'  art.  Old  Appel 
lations  of  Numbers. 


THE  METHOD   OF  MEANS. 


quantities,  as  before,  their  reciprocals  are  —  and  — ,  the 

a  b 

mean  of  which  is  i(~  +  y)3  and  the    reciprocal  again  is 

— r.     Other  kinds  of  means  might  no  doubt  be  invented 
for  particular  purposes,  and  we  might  apply  the  term,  as 

De  Morgan  pointed  out e,  to  any  quantity  a  function  of 
which  is  equal  to  a  function  of  two  or  more  other 
quantities,  and  is  such,  that  the  interchange  of  these  latter 
quantities  among  themselves  will  make  no  alteration  in 
the  value  of  the  function.  Symbolically,  if  ^  (y,  y,  y  .  .  . .) 
=  <p  ( #„  x2,  03,  ...  .),  then  y  is  a  kind  of  mean  of  the 
quantities  xt,  x2,  &c. 

The  geometric  mean  is  necessarily  adopted  in  certain 
cases.  Thus  when  we  estimate  the  work  done  against 
a  force  which  varies  inversely  as  the  square  of  the 
distance  from  a  fixed  point,  the  mean  force  is  the  geo 
metric  mean  between  the  forces  at  the  beginning  and  end 
of  the  path  f.  When  in  an  imperfect  balance,  we  reverse 
the  weights  to  eliminate  error,  the  true  weight  will  be  the 
geometric  mean  of  the  two  apparent  weights  of  the  one 
body  (see  p.  410). 

In  almost  all  the  calculations  of  statistics  and  commerce 
the  geometric  mean  ought,  strictly  speaking,  to  be  used. 
Thus  if  a  commodity  rises  in  price  100  per  cent,  and 
another  remains  unaltered,  the  mean  rise  of  price  is  not 
50  per  cent,  because  the  ratio  150  :  200  is  not  the  same 
as  100  :  150.  The  mean  ratio  is  as  unity  to  x/i -00x2-00 
or  i  to  i '4 1.  The  difference  between  the  three  kinds  of 
mean  in  such  a  case,  as  I  have  elsewhere  shown  *,  is  very 
considerable,  being  as  follows— 

e  'Penny  Cyclopaedia,'  art.  Mean. 

1  Thomson  and  Tait,  '  Treatise  on  Natural  Philosophy/  vol.  i.  p.  366. 

g  '  Journal  of  the  Statistical  Society,'  June     865,  vol.  xxviii.  p.  296. 

E  e  2 


420  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

Arithmetic  mean  50  per  cent. 

Geometric       „       41        „ 

Harmonic        „       33 

In  all  calculations  concerning  the  average  rate  of 
progress  of  a  community,  or  any  of  its  operations,  the 
geometric  mean  should  be  employed.  For  if  a  quantity 
increases  100  per  cent,  in  100  years,  it  would  not  on  the 
average  increase  10  per  cent,  in  each  ten  years,  as  the 
10  per  cent,  would  at  the  end  of  each  decade  be  calculated 
upon  larger  and  larger  quantities,  and  give  at  the  end  of 
100  years  much  more  than  100  per  cent.,  in  fact  as  much 
as  159  per  cent.  The  true  mean  rate  in  each  decade 
would  be  i£/2~  or  about  I'oy,  that  is,  the  increase 
would  be  about  7  per  cent,  in  each  ten  years.  But 
when  the  quantities  differ  but  little,  the  arithmetic  and 
geometric  means  are  approximately  the  same.  Thus  the 
arithmetic  mean  of  rooo  and  rooi  is  rooos,  and  the 
geometric  mean  is  about  1*0004998,  the  difference  being 
of  an  order  inappreciable  in  almost  all  scientific  or  prac 
tical  processes.  Even  in  the  comparison  of  standard  weights 
by  Gauss'  method  of  transposition  the  arithmetic  mean  may 
usually  be  substituted  for  the  geometric  mean  which  is 
the  true  result. 

Regarding  the  mean  in  the  absence  of  express  qualifica 
tion  to  the  contrary  as  the  common  arithmetic  mean,  we 
must  still  distinguish  between  its  two  uses  where  it 
defines  with  more  or  less  accuracy  and  probability  a 
really  existing  quantity,  and  where  it  acts  as  a  mere 
representative  of  other  quantities.  If  I  make  many 
experiments  to  determine  the  specific  gravity  of  a  homo 
geneous  piece  of  gold  there  is  a  certain  definite  ratio 
which  I  wish  to  approximate  to,  and  the  mean  of  my 
separate  results  will,  in  the  absence  of  any  reasons  to  the 
contrary,  be  the  most  probable  approximate  result.  When 
we  determine  on  the  other  hand  the  mean  density  of  the 


THE  METHOD  OF  MEANS.  421 

earth,  it  is  exceedingly  unlikely  that  there  is  any  part  of 
the  earth  exactly  of  that  density,  and,  as  the  crust  is  only 
about  half  the  mean  density,  there  must  be  other  parts  of 
greater  density.  I  may  also  determine  the  mean  specific 
gravity  of  a  body  composed  of  iron  and  gold,  so  that 
there  will  certainly  be  no  portion  possessing  the  mean 
density. 

The  very  different  signification  of  the  word  '  mean '  in 

*/  O 

these  two  uses  has  been  fully  explained  by  M.  Quetelet1', 
and  the  importance  of  the  distinction  has  moreover  been 
pointed  out  by  Sir  John  Herschel  in  reviewing  his  work  \ 
It  is  much  to  be  desired  that  scientific  men  would  mark 
the  difference  by  using  the  word  mean  only  in  the  former 
sense  when  it  denotes  approximation  to  a  definite  exist 
ing  quantity  ;  and  average,  when  the  mean  is  only  a 
fictitious  quantity,  used  for  the  convenience  of  thought 
and  expression.  The  etymology  of  this  word  '  average '  is 
somewhat  obscure  ;  but  according  to  De  Morgan k  it  comes 
from  averia,  '  havings  or  possessions/  especially  applied  to 
farm  stock.  By  the  accidents  of  language  averagium 
came  to  mean  the  labour  of  farm  horses  to  which  the  lord 
was  entitled,  and  it  probably  acquired  in  this  manner  the 
notion  of  distributing  a  whole  into  parts,  a  sense  in  which 
it  was  very  early  applied  to  maritime  averages  or  contri 
butions  of  the  other  owners  of  cargo  to  those  whose  goods 
have  been  thrown  overboard  or  used  for  the  safety  of  the 
vessel. 

h  '  Letters  on  the  Theory  of  Probabilities,'  trans! .  by  Downes,  Part  ii. 
i  Herschel's  'Essays,'  &c.  pp.  404,  405. 

k  <  On  the  Theory  of  Errors  of  Observations,'  '  Cambridge  Philosophical 
Transactions/  vol.  x.  Part  ii.  416. 


122  THE    PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

On  the  Fictitious  Mean  or  Average  Result. 

Although  the  average  when  employed  in  its  proper 
sense  of  a  fictitious  mean,  represents  no  really  existing 
quantity,  it  is  yet  of  the  highest  scientific  importance,  as 
enabling  us  to  conceive  in  a  single  result  a  multitude 
of  complex  details.  It  enables  us  to  make  a  hypothetical 
simplification  of  a  problem,  and  avoid  complexity  without 
committing  error.  Thus  the  aggregate  weight  of  a  body  is 
the  sum  of  the  weights  of  the  indefinitely  small  particles, 
each  acting  at  a  different  place,  so  that  the  simplest 
mechanical  problem  concerning  a  body  really  resolves  itself, 
strictly  speaking,  into  an  infinite  number  of  distinct  pro 
blems.  We  owe  to  Archimedes  the  first  introduction  of 
the  beautiful  idea  that  one  point  might  be  discovered  in 
a  gravitating  body  such  that  the  weight  of  all  the  par 
ticles  might  be  regarded  as  concentrated  in  that  point, 
and  yet  the  behaviour  of  the  whole  body  would  be  exactly 
represented  by  the  behaviour  of  this  heavy  point.  This 
Centre  of  Gravity  may  be  within  the  body,  as  in  the 
case  of  a  sphere,  or  it  may  be  in  empty  space,  as  in 
the  case  of  a  ring.  Any  two  bodies,  whether  connected 
or  separate,  may  be  conceived  as  having  a  centre  of 
gravity  ;  that  of  the  sun  and  earth,  for  instance,  lying 
within  the  sun  and  only  267  miles  from  its  centre. 

Although  we  most  commonly  use  the  notion  of  a  centre 
or  average  point  with  regard  to  gravity,  the  same  notion 
is  applicable  to  many  other  cases.  Terrestrial  gravity 
is  only  one  case  of  approximately  parallel  forces,  so  that 
the  centre  of  gravity  is  but  a  special  case  of  the  more 
general  Centre  of  Parallel  Forces.  Wherever  a  number 
of  forces  of  whatever  amount  act  in  parallel  lines,  it 
is  possible  to  discover  a  point  at  which  the  algebraic 
sum  of  the  forces  may  be  imagined  to  act  with  exactly 
the  same  effect.  Water  in  a  cistern  presses  against  the 


THE  METHOD  OF  MEANS.  423 

side  with  a  pressure  varying  according  to  the  depth, 
but  always  in  a  direction  perpendicular  to  the  side. 
We  may  then  conceive  the  whole  pressure  as  exerted 
on  one  point,  which  will  be  one-third  from  the  bottom 
of  the  cistern,  and  may  be  called  the  Centre  of  Pressure. 
The  Centre  of  Oscillation  of  a  pendulum,  discovered  by 
Huyghens,  is  that  point  at  which  the  whole  weight  of 
the  pendulum  may  be  considered  as  concentrated,  without 
altering  the  time  of  oscillation  (see  p.  370).  Similarly 
when  one  body  strikes  another  the  Centre  of  Percussion 
is  that  point  in  the  striking  body  at  which  all  its  mass 
might  be  concentrated  without  altering  the  effect  of  the 
stroke.  Mathematicians  have  also  described  the  Centre 
of  Gyration,  the  Centre  of  Conversion,  the  Centre  of 
Friction,  &c. 

We  ought  however  carefully  to  distinguish  between 
those  circumstances  in  which  an  invariable  centre  can 
be  assigned,  and  those  in  which  it  cannot.  In  perfect 
strictness,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  a  true  invariable 
centre  of  gravity.  As  a  general  rule  a  body  is  capable 
of  possessing  an  invariable  centre  only  for  perfectly 
parallel  forces,  and  gravity  never  does  act  in  absolutely 
parallel  lines.  Thus,  as  usual,  we  find  that  our  concep 
tions  are  only  hypothetically  correct,  and  only  approxi 
mately  applicable  to  real  circumstances.  There  are  indeed 
certain  geometrical  forms,  called  Centrobaric},  such  that 
bodies  of  that  shape  would  attract  each  other  exactly 
as  if  the  mass  were  concentrated  at  the  centre  of  gravity, 
whether  the  forces  act  in  a  parallel  manner  or  not. 
Newton  shewed  that  uniform  spheres  of  matter  have 
this  property,  and  this  truth  proved  of  the  greatest  im 
portance  in  simplifying  his  calculations.  But  it  is  after 
all  a  purely  hypothetical  truth,  because  we.  can  nowhere 
meet  with,  nor  can  we  construct,  a  perfectly  spherical 

1  Thomson  and  Tait,  'Treatise  on  Natural  Philosophy/  vol.  i.  p.  394. 


424  THE  PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

and  homogeneous  body.  The  slightest  irregularity  or  pro 
trusion  from  the  surface  will  destroy  the  rigorous  cor 
rectness  of  the  assumption.  The  spheroid,  on  the  other 
hand,  has  no  invariable  centre  at  which  its  mass  may 
always  be  regarded  as  concentrated.  The  point  at  which 
its  resultant  attraction  acts  will  move  about  according 
to  the  distance  and  position  of  the  other  attracting  body, 
and  it  will  only  coincide  with  the  centre  as  regards  an  in 
finitely  distant  body  whose  attractive  forces  may  be  con 
sidered  as  acting  in  parallel  lines. 

Physicists  speak  familiarly  of  the  pole  of  a  magnet, 
and  the  term  may  be  used  with  convenience.  But,  if 
we  attach  any  real  and  definite  meaning  to  it,  the  pole 
is  not  the  end  of  the  magnet,  nor  is  it  any  one  fixed 
point  within,  but  the  variable  point  from  which  the 
resultant  of  all  the  forces  exerted  by  the  particles  in 
the  whole  bar  upon  exterior  magnetic  particles  may  be 
considered  as  acting.  The  pole  is,  in  short,  a  Centre  of 
Magnetic  Forces ;  but  as  those  forces  are  really  never 
parallel,  this  centre  will  vary  in  position  according  to 
the  relative  place  of  the  object  attracted.  Only  when 
we  regard  the  magnet  as  attracting  a  very  distant,  or, 
strictly  speaking,  infinitely  distant  particle,  does  the 
centre  become  a  fixed  point,  situated  in  short  magnets 
approximately  at  one  sixth  of  the  whole  length  from 
each  end  of  the  bar.  We  have  in  the  above  instances 
of  centres  or  poles  of  force  sufficient  examples  of  the  mode 
in  which  the  Fictitious  Mean  or  Average  is  employed  in 
physical  science. 

The  Precise  Mean  Result. 

We  now  turn  to  that  mode  of  employing  the  mean 
result  which  is  analogous  to  the  method  of  reversal,  but 
which  is  brought  into  practice  in  a  most  extensive  manner 
throughout  many  branches  of  physical  science.  We  find 


THE  METHOD  OF  MEANS.  425 

the  simplest  possible  case  in  the  determination  of  the 
latitude  of  a  place  by  observations  of  the  Pole-star. 
Tycho  Brahe  suggested  that  if  the  elevation  of  any  cir- 
cumpolar  star  were  observed  at  its  higher  and  lower 
passages  across  the  meridian,  half  the  sum  of  the  elevations 
would  be  the  latitude  of  the  place,  which  is  equal  to  the 
height  of  the  pole.  Such  a  star  is  as  much  above  the 
pole  at  its  highest  point,  as  it  is  below  at  its  lowest,  so 
that  the  mean  must  necessarily  give  the  height  of  the 
pole  itself  free  from  doubt,  except  as  regards  incidental 
errors  of  observation.  The  Pole-star  is  usually  selected 
for  the  purpose  of  such  observations  because  it  describes 
the  smallest  circle,  and  is  thus  on  the  whole  least  affected 
by  atmospheric  refraction. 

Whenever  several  causes  are  in  action,  each  of  which 
at  one  time  increases  and  at  another  time  decreases  the 
joint  effect  by  equal  quantities,  we  may  apply  this  method 
and  disentangle  the  effects.  Thus  the  solar  and  lunar 
tides  roll  on  in  almost  complete  independence  of  each 
other.  When  the  moon  is  new  or  full  the  solar  tide  coin 
cides,  or  nearly  so,  with  that  caused  by  the  moon,  and  the 
joint  effect  is  the  sum  of  the  separate  effects.  When  the 
moon  is  in  quadrature,  or  half  full,  the  two  tides  are 
acting  in  opposition,  one  raising  and  the  other  depressing 
the  water,  so  that  we  observe  only  the  difference  of  the 
effects.  We  have  in  fact — 

Spring  tide  =  lunar  tide  +  solar  tide 
Neap  tide     =  lunar  tide  —  solar  tide. 
We  have  only  then  to  add  together  the  heights  of  the 
maximum  spring  tide  and  the  minimum  neap  tide,  and 
half  the  sum  is  the  true  height  of  the  lunar  tide.     Half 
the  difference  of  the  spring  and  neap  tides  on  the  other 
hand  gives  the  solar  tide. 

Effects  of  very  small  amount  may  with  great  approach 
to  certainty  be  detected  among  much  greater  fluctuations, 


426  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

provided  that  we  have  a  series  of  observations  sufficiently 
numerous  and  long  continued  to  enable  us  to  balance  all 
the  larger  effects  against  each  other.  For  this  purpose 
the  observations  should  be  continued  over  at  least  one 
complete  cycle,  in  which  the  effects  run  through  all  their 
variations,  and  return  exactly  to  the  same  relative  position 
as  at  the  commencement.  If  casual  or  irregular  disturbing 
causes  exist,  we  should  probably  require  many  such  cycles 
of  results  to  render  their  effect  inappreciable.  We  obtain 
the  desired  result  by  taking  the  mean  of  all  the  observa 
tions  in  which  a  cause  acts  positively,  and  the  mean  of  all 
in  which  it  acts  negatively.  Half  the  difference  of  these 
means  will  be  the  desired  quantity,  provided  indeed  that 
no  other  effect  happens  to  vary  in  the  same  period. 

Since  the  moon  causes  so  considerable  a  movement  of 
the  ocean,  it  is  evident  that  its  attraction  must  have  some 
effect  upon  the  atmosphere.  The  laws  of  these  tides  were 
investigated  by  Laplace,  but  as  it  would  be  impracticable 
by  theory  to  calculate  their  amount,  we  can  only  determine 
them  by  observation,  as  Laplace  predicted  that  they  would 
one  day  be  determined m.  But  the  oscillations  of  the 
barometer  thus  caused  are  far  smaller  than  the  oscillations 
due  to  several  other  causes.  Storms,  hurricanes,  or  changes 
of  weather  produce  movements  of  the  barometer  some 
times  as  much  as  a  thousand  times  as  great  as  the  tide  in 
question.  There  are  also  regular  daily,  yearly,  or  other 
fluctuations,  all  greater  than  the  desired  quantity.  To 
detect  and  measure  the  atmospheric  tide  it  was  desirable 
that  observations  should  be  made  in  a  place  as  free  as 
possible  from  irregular  disturbances.  On  this  account 
several  long  series  of  observations  were  made  at  St. 
Helena,  where  the  barometer  is  far  more  regular  in  its 
movements  than  in  a  continental  climate.  The  effect  of 
the  moon's  attraction  was  then  detected  by  taking  the 

m  '  Essai  Philosophiqne  sur  les  Probabilites/  pp.  49,  50. 


TUB  METHOD  OF  MEANS.  427 

mean  of  all  the  readings  when  the  moon  was  on  the  me 
ridian  and  the  similar  mean  when  she  was  on  the  horizon. 
The  difference  of  these  means  was  found  to  be  only 
•00365,  yet  it  was  possible  to  discover  even  the  variation 
of  this  tide  according  as  the  moon  was  nearer  to  or  further 
from  the  earth,  though  this  difference  was  only  "00056 
inch  n.  It  is  quite  evident  that  such  minute  effects  could 
never  be  discovered  in  a  purely  empirical  manner.  Having 
no  information  but  the  series  of  observations  before  us, 
we  could  have  no  clue  as  to  the  mode  of  grouping  them 
which  would  give  so  small  a  difference.  In  applying  this 
method  of  means  in  an  extensive  manner  we  must  gener 
ally  then  have  d  priori  knowledge  as  to  the  periods  at 
which  a  cause  will  act  in  one  direction  or  the  other. 

We  are  sometimes  able  to  eliminate  fluctuations  and 
take  a  mean  result  by  purely  mechanical  arrangements. 
The  daily  variations  of  temperature,  for  instance,  become 
imperceptible  one  or  two  feet  below  the  surface  of  the 
earth,  so  that  a  thermometer  placed  with  its  bulb  at  that 
depth  would  give  very  nearly  the  true  daily  mean  tem 
perature.  At  a  depth  of  twenty  feet  even  the  yearly 
fluctuations  would  become  nearly  effaced,  and  the  thermo 
meter  would  stand  a  little  above  the  true  mean  tempera 
ture  of  the  locality.  In  registering  the  rise  and  fall  of  the 
tide  by  a  tide-guage,  it  is  desirable  to  avoid  the  oscilla 
tions  arising  from  surface  waves,  which  is  very  readily 
accomplished  by  placing  the  float  which  marks  the  level 
of  the  water  in  a  cistern  communicating  by  a  small  hole 
with  the  sea.  Only  a  general  rise  or  fall  of  the  level  is 
then  perceptible,  just  as  in  the  marine  barometer  the 
narrow  tube  prevents  any  casual  fluctuations  and  allows 
only  a  continued  change  of  pressure  to  manifest  itself. 

11  Grant,  '  History  of  Physical  Astronomy,'  p.  163. 


428  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

Determination  of  the  Zero  point  by  the  Method 
of  Means, 

There  are  a  number  of  important  observations  in  which 
one  of  the  chief  difficulties  consists  in  defining  exactly  the 
zero  point  from  which  we  are  to  measure.  We  can  point 
a  telescope  with  great  precision  to  a  star  and  can  measure 
the  angle  through  which  the  telescope  is  raised  or  lowered 
to  a  second  of  arc  ;  but  all  this  precision  will  be  useless 
unless  we  can  know  exactly  where  the  centre  point  of 
the  heavens  is  from  which  we  measure,  or,  what  comes  to 
the  same  thing,  the  horizontal  line  90°  distant  from  it. 
Since  the  true  horizon  has  reference  to  the  figure  of  the 
earth  at  the  place  of  observation,  we  can  only  determine 
it  by  the  direction  of  gravity,  as  marked  either  by  the 
plumb-line  or  the  surface  of  a  liquid.  The  question  re 
solves  itself  then  into  the  most  accurate  mode  of  observing 
the  direction  of  gravity,  and  as  the  plumb-line  has  long 
been  found  hopelessly  inaccurate,  astronomers  generally 
employ  the  surface  of  mercury  in  repose  as  the  criterion 
of  horizontality.  They  ingeniously  observe  the  direction 
of  the  surface  by  making  a  star  the  index.  From  the 
Laws  of  Reflection  it  follows  that  the  angle  between  the 
direct  ray  from  a  star  and  that  reflected  from  a  surface 
of  mercury  will  be  exactly  double  the  angle  between  the 
surface  and  the  direct  ray  from  the  star.  Hence  the 
horizontal  or  zero  point  is  the  mean  between  the  apparent 
place  of  any  star  or  other  very  distant  object  and  its 
reflection  in  mercury. 

A  plumb-line  is  perpendicular,  or  a  liquid  surface  is  hori 
zontal  only  in  an  approximate  sense  ;  for  any  irregularity 
of  the  surface  of  the  earth,  a  mountain,  or  even  a  house 
must  cause  some  deviation  by  its  attracting  power.  To 
detect  such  deviation  might  seem  very  difficult,  because 
every  other  plumb-line  or  liquid  surface  would  be  equally 


THE  METHOD  OF  MEANS.  429 


affected  by  the  very  principles  of  gravity.  Nevertheless 
it  can  be  detected  ;  for  if  we  place  one  plumb-line  to  the 
north  of  a  mountain,  and  another  to  the  south,  they  will 
be  about  equally  deflected  in  opposite  directions,  and  if 
by  observations  on  the  same  star  we  can  measure  the  angle 
between  the  plumb-lines,  half  the  inclination  will  be  the 
deviation  of  either,  after  allowance  has  been  made  for  the 
inclination  due  to  the  difference  of  latitude  of  the  two 
places  of  observation.  By  this  mode  of  observation  ap 
plied  to  the  mountain  Schehallien  the  deviation  of  the 
plumb-line  was  accurately  measured  by  Maskelyne,  and 
thus  a  comparison  instituted  between  the  attractive  forces 
of  the  mountain  and  the  whole  globe,  which  led  to  a  very 
probable  estimate  of  the  earth's  average  density. 

In  some  cases  it  is  actually  better  to  determine  the  zero 
point  by  the  average  of  equally  diverging  quantities  than 
by  direct  observations.  Thus  in  delicate  weighings  by  a 
chemical  balance  it  is  requisite  to  ascertain  exactly  the 
point  at  which  the  beam  comes  to  rest,  and  when  standard 
weights  are  being  compared  the  position  of  the  beam  is 
ascertained  by  a  carefully  divided  scale  viewed  through  a 
microscope.  But  when  the  beam  is  just  coming  to  rest, 
friction,  small  impediments  or  other  accidental  causes 
may  readily  obstruct  it,  because  it  is  near  the  point  at 
which  the  force  of  stability  becomes  infinitely  small. 
Hence  it  is  found  better  to  let  the  beam  vibrate  and 
observe  the  terminal  points  of  the  vibrations.  The  mean 
between  two  extreme  points  will  nearly  indicate  the  posi 
tion  of  rest.  Friction  and  the  resistance  of  air  tend  to 
reduce  the  vibrations,  so  that  this  mean  will  be  erroneous 
by  half  the  amount  of  this  effect  during  a  half  vibration. 
But  by  taking  several  observations  we  may  determine 
this  retardation  and  allow  for  it.  Thus  if  a,  b,  c  be  the 
terminal  points  of  three  excursions  of  the  beam  from  the 
zero  of  the  scale,  then  ^  (a  +  &)  will  be  about  as  much 


430  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

erroneous  in  one  direction  as  ^  (b  +  c)  in  the  other,  so 
that  the  mean  of  these  two  means,  or  what  is  the  same, 
^  (a  +  2  b  +  c),  will  be  exceedingly  near  to  the  point  of 
rest0.  A  still  closer  approximation  may  be  made  by 
taking  four  readings  and  reducing  them  by  the  formula 
-5-  (a  +  2  b  +  2  c  +  d). 

The  accuracy  of  Baily's  experiments,  directed  to  deter 
mine  the  density  of  the  earth,  entirely  depended  upon  this 
mode  of  observing  oscillations.  The  balls  whose  gravi 
tation  was  measured  were  so  delicately  suspended  by  a 
torsion  balance  that  they  never  came  to  rest.  The  ex 
treme  points  of  the  oscillations  were  observed  both  when 
the  heavy  leaden  attracting  ball  was  on  one  side  and  on  the 
other.  The  difference  of  the  mean  points  when  the  leaden 
ball  was  on  the  right  hand  and  that  when  it  was  on  the 
left  hand  gave  double  the  amount  of  the  deflection. 

A  most  beautiful  instance  of  the  mode  of  avoiding  the 
use  of  a  zero  point  is  to  be  found  in  Mr.  E.  J.  Stone's 
observations  on  the  radiated  heat  of  the  fixed  stars.  The 
great  difficulty  in  these  observations  arose  from  the  com 
paratively  great  amounts  of  heat  which  were  sent  into  the 
telescope  from  the  atmosphere,  and  which  were  sufficient 
almost  entirely  to  disguise  the  feeble  heat  rays  of  a  star. 
But  Mr.  Stone  fixed  at  the  focus  of  his  telescope  a  double 
thermo-electric  pile  of  which  the  two  parts  were  reversed 
in  order.  Now  any  disturbance  of  temperature  which 
acted  upon  both  piles  uniformly  produced  no  effect 
upon  the  galvanometer  needle,  and  when  the  rays  of  the 
star  were  made  to  fall  alternately  upon  one  pile  and 
the  other,  the  total  amount  of  the  deflection  represented 
double  the  heating  power  of  the  star.  Thus  Mr.  Stone 
was  able  to  detect  with  much  certainty  a  heating  effect 
of  the  star  Arcturus,  which  even  when  concentrated 
by  the  telescope  amounted  only  to  ro^h  of  a  degree 

0  Gauss,  Taylor's  '  Scientific  Memoirs,'  vol.  ii.  p.  43,  &c. 


THE  METHOD  OF  MEAN'S.  431 

Fahrenheit,  and  which  represents  a  heating  effect  of  the 
direct  ray  of  only  about  o°'OOOOOi37  Fahrenheit,  equiva 
lent  to  the  heat  which  would  be  received  from  a  three- 
inch  cubic  vessel  full  of  boiling  water  at  the  distance  of 
400  yards  P.  It  is  probable  that  Mr.  Stone's  arrangement 
of  the  pile  might  be  usefully  employed  in  other  delicate 
thermometric  experiments  subject  to  considerable  disturb 
ing  influences. 

Determination  of  Maximum  Points. 

We  employ  the  method  of  means  in  a  certain  number 
of  observations  directed  to  determine  the  moment  at  which 
a  phenomenon  reaches  its  highest  point  in  quantity.  In 
noting  the  place  of  a  fixed  star  at  a  given  time  there  is 
no  difficulty  in  ascertaining  the  point  to  be  observed,  for  a 
star  in  a  good  telescope  presents  an  exceedingly  small  disc. 
In  observing  a  nebulous  body  which  from  a  bright  centre 
fades  gradually  away  on  all  sides,  it  will  not  be  possible 
to  select  with  certainty  the  middle  point.  In  many  such 
cases  the  best  method  is  not  to  select  arbitrarily  the  sup 
posed  middle  point,  but  points  of  equal  brightness  on 
either  side,  and  then  take  the  mean  of  the  observations  of 
these  two  points  for  the  centre.  As  a  general  rule,  a 
variable  quantity  in  reaching  its  maximum  increases  at  a 
less  and  less  rate,  and  after  passing  the  highest  point  be 
gins  to  decrease  by  insensible  degrees.  The  maximum  may 
indeed  be  defined  as  that  point  at  which  the  increase  or 
decrease  is  insensibly  small.  Hence  it  will  usually  be  the 
most  indefinite  point  in  the  whole  course,  and  if  we  can 
accurately  measure  the  phenomenon  we  shall  best  deter 
mine  the  place  of  the  maximum  by  determining  points  on 
either  side  at  which  the  ordinates  are  equal.  There  is 

P  '  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society,'  vol.  xviii,  p.  159  (Jan.  13,  1870). 
'Philosophical  Magazine'  (4th  Series),  vol.  xxxix.  p.  376. 


THE   PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 


moreover  this  advantage  in  the  method  that  several  points 
may  be  determined  with  the  corresponding  ones  on  the 
other  side,  and  the  mean  of  the  whole  taken  as  the  true 
place  of  the  maximum.  But  this  method  entirely  depends 
upon  the  existence  of  symmetry  in  the  curve,  so  that  of 
two  equal  ordinates  one  shall  be  as  far  on  one  side  of  the 
maximum  as  the  other  is  on  the  other  side.  The  method 
fails  when  other  laws  of  variation  prevail. 

In  tidal  observations  great  difficulty  is  encountered  in 
fixing  the  moment  of  high  water,  because  the  rate  at 
which  the  water  is  then  rising  or  falling  is  almost  imper 
ceptible.  Dr.  Whewell  proposed,  therefore,  to  note  the 
time  at  which  the  water  passes  a  fixed  point  somewhat 
below  the  maximum  both  in  rising  and  falling,  and  take 
the  mean  time  as  that  of  high  water.  But  this  mode  of 
proceeding  unfortunately  does  riot  give  a  correct  result, 
because  the  tide  follows  different  laws  in  rising  and  in 
falling.  There  is  a  difficulty  again  in  selecting  the  highest 
spring  tide,  another  object  of  much  importance  in  tidology. 
Laplace  discovered  that  the  tide  of  the  second  day  pre 
ceding  the  conjunction  of  the  sun  and  moon  is  nearly 
equal  to  that  of  the  fifth  day  following ;  and,  believing 
that  the  increase  and  decrease  of  the  tides  proceeded  in  a 
nearly  symmetrical  manner,  he  decided  that  the  highest 
tide  would  occur  about  thirty-six  hours  after  the  con 
junction,  that  is  half-way  between  the  second  day  before 
and  the  fifth  day  after  <i. 

This  method  is  also  employed  in  determining  the  time 
of  passage  of  the  middle  or  densest  point  of  a  stream  of 
meteors.  The  earth  takes  two  or  three  days  in  passing 
completely  through  the  November  stream ;  but  astro 
nomers  need  for  their  calculations  to  have  some  definite 
point  fixed  within  a  few  minutes  if  possible.  When  near 
to  the  middle  they  observe  the  numbers  of  meteors  which 

i  Airy  '  On  Tides  and  Waves,'  Encycl.  Metrop.  pp.  364 


THE  METHOD   OF   MEANS.  433 

come  within  the  sphere  of  vision  in  each  half  hour  or 
quarter  hour,  and  then,  assuming  that  the  law  of  varia 
tion  is  symmetrical,  they  select  a  moment  for  the  passage 
of  the  whole  body  equidistant  between  times  of  equal 
frequency. 

The  eclipses  of  Jupiter's  satellites  are  not  only  of  great 
interest  as  regards  the  motions  of  the  satellites  themselves, 
but  used  to  be,  and  perhaps  still  are,  of  importance  in  de 
termining  longitudes,  because  they  are  events  occurring 
at  fixed  moments  of  absolute  time,  and  visible  in  all  parts 
of  the  planetary  system  at  the  same  time,  allowance  being 
made  for  the  interval  occupied  by  the  light  in  travelling. 
But  as  is  excellently  explained  by  Sir  John  Herschelr,  the 
moment  of  the  event  is  wanting  in  definiteness,  partly 
because  the  long  cone  of  Jupiter's  shadow  is  surrounded 
by  a  penumbra,  and  partly  because  the  satellite  has  itself 
a  sensible  disc,  and  takes  a  certain  time  in  entering  the 
shadow.  Different  observers  using  different  telescopes 
would  usually  select  different  moments  for  that  of  the 
eclipse.  But  it  is  evident  that  the  increase  of  light  in 
the  emersion  will  proceed  according  to  a  law  exactly  the 
reverse  of  that  observed  in  the  immersion,  so  that  if  an 
observer  notes  the  time  of  both  events  with  the  same  tele 
scope,  he  will  be  as  much  too  soon  in  one  observation  as 
he  is  too  late  in  the  other,  and  the  mean  moment  of  the 
two  observations  will  represent  with  considerable  accuracy 
the  time  when  the  satellite  is  in  the  middle  of  the  shadow. 
The  personal  error  of  judgment  of  the  observer  is  thus 
eliminated,  provided  that  he  takes  care  to  act  at  the 
emersion  as  he  did  at  the  immersion. 

r  '  Outlines  of  Astronomy,'  4th  edition,  §  538. 


Ff 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

THE    LAW     OF     ERROR. 

To  bring  error  itself  under  law  might  seem  beyond 
human  power.  He  who  errs  surely  diverges  from  law, 
and  it  might  well  be  deemed  hopeless  to  suppose  that  out 
of  error  we  can  draw  truth.  One  of  the  most  remarkable 
achievements  of  the  human  intellect  is  the  establishment 
of  a  general  theory  which  not  only  enables  us  among  dis 
crepant  results  to  approximate  to  the  truth,  but  to  assign 
the  degree  of  probability  which  fairly  attaches  to  this  con 
clusion.  It  would  be  a  gross  misapprehension  indeed  to 
suppose  that  this  law  is  necessarily  the  best  guide  under 
all  circumstances.  Every  measuring  instrument  and  every 
form  of  experiment  may  have  its  own  special  law  of  error ; 
there  may  in  one  instrument  be  a  tendency  in  one  direc 
tion  and  in  another  in  the  opposite  direction.  Every  pro 
cess  has  its  peculiar  liabilities  to  mistake  and  disturbance, 
and  we  are  never  relieved  from  the  necessity  of  vigilantly 
providing  against  such  special  difficulties.  The  general 
Law  of  Error  is  the  best  guide  only  when  we  have  ex 
hausted  all  other  means  of  approximation,  and  still  find 
discrepancies,  which  are  due  to  entirely  unknown  causes. 
We  must  treat  such  residual  differences  in  some  way  or 
other,  since  they  will  occur  in  all  accurate  experiments, 
and  as  their  peculiar  nature  and  origin  is  assumed  to  be 
unknown,  there  is  no  reason  why  we  should  treat  them 
differently  in  different  cases.  Accordingly  the  ultimate 
Law  of  Error  must  be  a  uniform  and  general  one. 


THE   LAW   OF  ERROR.  435 

It  is  perfectly  recognised  by  mathematicians  that  in 
each  special  case  a  special  Law  of  Error  may  apply,  and 
should  be  discovered  and  adopted  if  possible.  '  Nothing 
can  be  more  unlikely  than  that  the  errors  committed  in  all 
classes  of  observations  should  follow  the  same  lawa/  and 
the  special  Laws  of  Error  which  will  apply  to  certain  in 
struments,  as  for  instance  the  repeating  circle,  have  been 
investigated  by  M.  Bravaisb.  He  concludes  that  every 
partial  and  distinct  cause  of  error  gives  rise  to  a  curve  of 
possibility  of  errors,  which  may  have  any  form  whatever, — 
a  curve  which  we  may  either  be  able  or  unable  to  discover, 
and  which  in  the  first  case  may  be  determined  by  con 
siderations  a  priori,  on  the  peculiar  nature  of  this  cause, 
or  which  may  be  determined  d  posteriori  by  observation. 
Whenever  it  is  practicable  and  worth  the  labour,  we  ought 
to  investigate  these  special  conditions  of  error ;  never 
theless,  when  there  are  a  great  number  of  different  sources 
of  minute  error,  the  general  resultant  will  always  tend  to 
obey  that  general  law  which  we  are  about  to  consider. 

Establishment  of  the  Law  of  Error. 

Mathematicians  agree  far  better  as  to  the  nature  of  the 
ultimate  Law  of  Error  than  they  do  as  to  the  manner  in 
which  it  can  be  deduced  and  proved.  They  agree  that 
among  a  number  of  discrepant  results  of  observation,  that 
mean  quantity  is  probably  the  most  nearly  approximate 
to  the  truth  which  makes  the  sum  of  the  squares  of  the 
errors  as  small  as  possible.  But  there  are  at  least  three 
different  ways  in  which  this  principle  has  been  arrived  at 
respectively  by  Gauss,  by  Laplace,  by  Quetelet  and  by 
Sir  John  Herschel.  Gauss  proceeds  much  upon  assump- 

a  'Philosophical  Magazine,'  3rd  Series,  vol.  xxxvii.  p.  324. 
b  '  Letters  on  the  Theory  of  Probabilities,'  by  Quetelet,  transl.  by  0.  G. 
Dowries,  Notes  to  Letter  XXVI.  pp.  286-295. 

F  f  2 


436  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

tion ;  Herschel  rests  upon  geometrical  considerations ;  while 
Laplace  and  Quetelet  regard  the  Law  of  Error  as  a  de 
velopment  of  the  doctrine  of  combinations  ;  that  of  Gauss 
may  be  first  noticed. 

The  Law  of  Error  expresses  the  comparative  probability 
of  errors  of  various  magnitude,  and  partly  from  ex 
perience,  partly  from  a  priori  considerations,  we  may 
readily  lay  down  certain  conditions  to  which  the  law  will 
certainly  conform.  It  may  fairly  be  assumed  as  a  first 
principle  to  guide  us  in  the  selection  of  the  law,  that  large 
errors  will  be  far  less  frequent  and  probable  than  small 
ones.  We  know  that  very  large  errors  are  almost  im 
possible,  so  that  the  probability  must  rapidly  decrease  as 
the  amount  of  the  error  increases.  A  second  principle  is 
that  positive  and  negative  errors  shall  be  equally  pro 
bable,  which  may  certainly  be  assumed,  because  we  are 
supposed  to  be  devoid  of  any  knowledge  as  to  the  causes 
of  the  residual  errors.  It  follows  that  the  probability  of 
the  error  must  be  a  function  of  an  even  power  of  the 
magnitude,  that  is  of  the  square,  or  the  fourth  po\ver,  or 
the  sixth  power,  otherwise  the  probability  of  the  same 
amount  of  error  would  vary  accordingly  as  the  error  was 
positive  or  negative.  The  even  powers  &2,  x4,  x6,  &c.,  are 
always  intrinsically  positive,  whether  x  be  positive  or 
negative.  There  is  no  d  priori  reason  why  one  rather 
than  another  of  these  even  powers  should  be  selected. 
Gauss  himself  allows  that  the  fourth  or  sixth  powers  would 
fulfil  the  conditions  as  well  as  the  second0,  but  in  the 
absence  of  any  theoretical  reasons  we  should  prefer  the 
second  power,  because  it  leads  to  formulae  of  great  com 
parative  simplicity.  Did  the  Law  of  Error  necessitate  the 
use  of  the  higher  powers  of  the  error,  the  complexity  of 

c  '  Me'thode  des  Moindres  Carres.'  '  Me'moires  sur  la  Combinaison  des 
Observations,  par  Ch.  Fr.  Gauss.  Traduit  en  Franyais  par  J.  Bertram!, 
Paris,  1855,  pp.  6,  133,  &c. 


THE  LAW  OF  ERROR.  437 

the  necessary  calculations  would  much  reduce  the  utility 
of  the  theory. 

By  a  process  of  reasoning,  which  it  would  be  undesirable 
to  attempt  to  follow  in  detail  in  this  place,  it  is  shown 
that,  under  these  conditions,  the  most  probable  result  of 
any  series  of  recorded  observations  is  that  which  makes 
the  sum  of  the  squares  of  the  errors  the  least  possible. 
Let  a,  b,  c,  &c.,  be  the  results  of  observation,  and  x  the 
quantity  selected  as  the  most  probable,  that  is  the  most 
free  from  unknown  errors  :  then  we  must  determine  x  so 

that  (a  —  x)z  +  (b  —  x)z  +  (c  -  x)2  + shall  be  the  least 

possible  quantity.  Thus  we  arrive  at  the  celebrated 
Method  of  Least  Squares,  as  it  is  usually  called,  which 
appears  to  have  been  first  distinctly  put  in  practice  by 
Gauss  in  1795,  while  Legendre  first  published  in  1806  an 
account  of  the  process  in  his  work,  entitled,  '  Nouvelles 
Methodes  pour  la  determination  des  Orbites  des  Cometes.' 
It  is  worthy  of  notice,  however,  that  Roger  Cotes  had 
long  previously  recommended  a  method  of  equivalent 
nature  in  his  tract,  'Estimatio  Erroris  in  Mixta  Mathesid.' 

Herschel's  Geometrical  Proof. 

A  second  method  of  demonstrating  the  Principle  of 
Least  Squares  was  proposed  by  Sir  John  Herschel,  and 
although  only  applicable  to  geometrical  notions,  it  is  re 
markable  as  showing  that  from  whatever  point  of  view 
we  regard  the  subject,  the  same  principle  will  be  detected. 
After  assuming  that  some  general  law  must  exist,  and 
that  it  is  subject  to  the  general  principles  of  proba 
bility,  he  supposes  that  a  ball  is  dropped  from  a  high 
point  with  the  intention  that  it  shall  strike  a  given  mark 
on  a  horizontal  plane.  In  the  absence  of  any  known 
causes  of  deviation  it  will  either  strike  that  mark,  or,  as 

d  De  Morgan,  'Penny  Cyclopaedia,'  art.  Least  Squares. 


438  THE   PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

is  infinitely  more  probable,  diverge  from  it  by  an  amount 
which  we  must  regard  as  error  of  unknown  origin.  Now, 
to  quote  the  words  of  Sir  J.  Herschel6,  '  the  probability  of 
that  error  is  the  unknown  function  of  its  square,  i.  e.  of 
the  sum  of  the  squares  of  its  deviations  in  any  two  rect 
angular  directions.  Now,  the  probability  of  any  deviation 
depending  solely  on  its  magnitude,  and  not  on  its  direc 
tion,  it  follows  that  the  probability  of  each  of  these  rect 
angular  deviations  must  be  the  same  function  of  its  square. 
And  since  the  observed  oblique  deviation  is  equivalent  to 
the  two  rectangular  ones,  supposed  concurrent,  and  which 
are  essentially  independent  of  one  another,  and  is,  there 
fore,  a  compound  event  of  which  they  are  the  simple  in 
dependent  constituents,  therefore  its  probability  will  be 
the  product  of  their  separate  probabilities.  Thus  the 
form  of  our  unknown  function  comes  to  be  determined 
from  this  condition,  viz.,  that  the  product  of  such  functions 
of  two  independent  elements  is  equal  to  the  same  function 
of  their  sum.  But  it  is  shown  in  every  work  on  algebra 
that  this  property  is  the  peculiar  characteristic  of,  and 
belongs  only  to,  the  exponential  or  antilogarithmic  function. 
This,  then,  is  the  function  of  the  square  of  the  error,  which 
expresses  the  probability  of  committing  that  error.  That 
probability  decreases,  therefore,  in  geometrical  progression, 
as  the  square  of  the  error  increases  in  arithmetical/ 

Laplace's  and  Quetelet's  Proof  of  the  Law 
of  Error. 

However  much  presumption  the  modes  of  determining 
the  Law  of  Error,  already  described,  may  give  in  favour 
of  the  law  usually  adopted,  it  is  difficult  to  feel  that  the 

e  '  Edinburgh  Eeview,'  July  1 850,  vol.  xcii.  p.  1 7.  Reprinted  '  Essays/ 
P-  399-  This  method  of  demonstration  is  discussed  by  Boole,  '  Trans 
actions  of  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh/  vol.  xxi.  pp.  627-630. 


THE  LA  W  OF  ERROR. 


arguments  are  satisfactory  and  conclusive.  The  law 
adopted  is  chosen  rather  on  the  grounds  of  convenience 
and  plausibility,  than  because  it  can  be  seen  to  be  the 
true  and  necessary  law.  We  can  however  approach  the 
subject  from  an  entirely  different  point  of  view,  and  yet 
get  to  the  same  result. 

Let  us  assume  that  a  particular  observation  is  subject 
to  four  chances  of  error,  each  of  which  will  increase  the 
result  one  inch  if  it  occurs.  Each  of  these  errors  is  to  be 
regarded  as  an  event  independent  of  the  rest  and  we  can 
therefore  assign,  by  the  theory  of  probability,  the  com 
parative  probability  and  frequency  of  each  conjunction  of 
errors.  From  the  Arithmetical  Triangle  (pp.  208,  213)  we 
learn  that  the  ways  of  happening  are  as  follows  :— 

No  error  at  all     .  .          .  i  way. 

Error  of  i  inch    .  ...     4  ways. 

Error  of  2  inches  .         .         .6  ways. 

Error  of  3  inches  .          .          .4  ways. 

Error  of  4  inches  .         .  i  way. 

We  may  infer  that  the  error  of  two  inches  is  the  most 
likely  to  occur,  and  will  occur  in  the  long  run  in  six  cases 
out  of  sixteen.  Errors  of  one  and  three  inches  will  be 
equally  likely,  but  will  occur  less  frequently ;  while  no 
error  at  all,  or  one  of  four  inches  will  be  a  comparatively 
rare  occurrence.  If  we  now  suppose  the  errors  to  act  as 
often  in  one  direction  as  the  other,  the  effect  will  be  to 
alter  the  average  error  by  the  amount  of  two  inches,  and 
we  shall  have  the  following  results  :— 

Negative  error  of  2  inches  .         .         .     i  way. 
Negative  error  of  i  inch      .         .         .4  ways. 

No  error  at  all 6  ways. 

Positive  error  of  i  inch        .         .         .4  ways. 
Positive  error  of  2  inches     .         .  i  way. 

We  may  now  imagine  the  number  of  causes  of  error 


440 


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 


increased  and  the  amount  of  each  error  decreased,  and  the 
arithmetical  triangle  will  always  give  us  the  proportional 
frequency  of  the  resulting  errors.  Thus  if  there  be  five 
positive  causes  of  error  and  five  negative  causes,  the  fol 
lowing  table  shows  the  comparative  numbers  of  aggregate 
errors  of  various  amount  which  will  be  the  result : — 


Direction  of  Error. 

Positive  Error. 

Negative  Error. 

Amount  of  Error. 

5.  4.    3.     2,      i 

O 

i,      2,     3,    4,  5 

Number  of  such  Errors. 

I,   IO,  45,   I2O,  210 

252 

210,  120,  45,  10,  i 

It  is  plain  that  from  such  numbers  I  can  ascertain  the 
probability  of  any  particular  amount  of  error  under  the 
conditions  supposed.  Thus  the  probability  of  a  positive 


error  of  exactly  one  inch  is 


1024' 


in  which  fraction  the 


numerator  is  the  exact  number  of  combinations  giving 
one  inch  positive  error,  and  the  denominator  the  whole 
number  of  possible  errors  of  all  magnitudes.  I  can  also, 
by  adding  together  the  appropriate  numbers,  get  the  pro 
bability  of  an  error  not  exceeding  a  certain  amount.  Thus 
the  probability  of  an  error  of  three  inches  or  less,  positive 
or  negative,  is  a  fraction  whose  numerator  is  the  sum  of 
45  +  120  +  210+252  +  210+120  +  45,  and  the  denomi 
nator,  as  before,  giving  the  result . 

We  may  see  at  once  that,  according  to  these  principles, 
the  probability  of  small  errors  is  far  greater  than  of  large 
ones:  thus  the  odds  are  1002  to  22,  or  more  than  45  to  i, 
that  the  error  will  not  exceed  three  inches ;  and  the  odds 
are  1022  to  2  against  the  occurrence  of  the  greatest  pos 
sible  error  of  five  inches.  The  existence  of  no  error  at  all 
is  the  most  likely  event ;  but  a  small  error,  such  as  that  of 
one  inch  positive,  is  little  less  likely. 


THE  LAW  OF  ERROR.  441 

If  any  case  should  arise  in  which  the  observer  knows 
the  number  and  magnitude  of  the  independent  errors 
which  may  occur,  he  ought  certainly  to  calculate  from  the 
Arithmetical  Triangle  the  special  Law  of  Error  which  would 
apply.  But  the  general  law,  of  which  we  are  in  search, 
is  to  be  used  in  the  dark,  when  we  have  no  knowledge 
whatever  of  the  sources  of  error.  To  assume  any  special 
number  of  causes  of  error  is  then  an  arbitrary  proceeding, 
and  mathematicians  have  chosen  the  least  arbitrary  course 
of  imagining  the  existence  of  an  infinite  number  of  in 
finitely  small  errors,  just  as,  in  the  inverse  method  of 
probabilities,  an  infinite  number  of  infinitely  improbable 
hypotheses  were  submitted  to  calculation  (p.  296). 

The  reasons  in  favour  of  this  choice  are  of  several 
different  kinds. 

1.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  there  may  exist  infinitely 
numerous  causes  of  error  in  any  act  of  observation. 

2.  The  resulting  law  on  the  hypothesis  of  a  large  finite, 
or  even  a  moderate  finite  number  of  causes  of  error,  does 
not  appreciably  differ  from  that  given  by  the  hypothesis 
of  infinity. 

3.  We  gain  by  the  hypothesis  of  infinity  a  general  law 
capable  of  ready  calculation,  and  applicable  by  uniform 
rules  to  all  problems. 

4.  This  law,  when  tested  by  comparison  with  extensive 
series  of  observations,   is  strikingly  verified,  as  will  be 
shown  in  a  later  section. 

When  we  imagine  the  existence  of  any  large  number  of 
causes  of  error,  for  instance  one  hundred,  the  numbers  of 
combinations  become  impracticably  large,  as  may  be  seen 
to  be  the  case  from  a  glance  at  the  Arithmetical  Triangle 
(p.  208),  which  proceeds  only  up  to  the  seventeenth  line. 
M.  Quetelet,  by  suitable  abbreviating  processes,  succeeded 
in  calculating  out  a  table  of  probability  of  errors  on  the 


442 


THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 


hypothesis  of  one  thousand  distinct  causes f ;  but  mathe 
maticians  have  generally  proceeded  on  the  hypothesis  of 
infinity,  and  then,  by  some  of  the  beautiful  devices  of 
analysis,  have  substituted  a  general  law  of  easy  treatment. 
In  mathematical  works  upon  the  subject,  it  is  shown  that 
the  standard  Law  of  Error  is  expressed  in  the  formula 

y=  Ye-<*\ 

in  which  x  is  the  amount  of  the  error,  Y  the  maximum 
ordinate  of  the  curve  of  error,  and  c  a  number  constant 
for  each  series  of  observations,  and  expressing  the  general 
amount  of  the  tendency  to  error,  but  varying  between 
one  series  of  observations  and  another,  while  <?  is  the 

peculiar  constant,  2*71828 the  base  of  the  Naperian 

logarithms.  To  show  the  close  correspondence  of  this 
general  law  with  the  special  law  which  might  be  derived 
from  the  supposition  of  any  moderate  number  of  causes 
of  error,  I  have  in  the  accompanying  figure  drawn  a 


curved   line   representing   accurately  the  variation  of  y 
when  x  in  the  above  formula  is  taken  equal  to  o,  -,  i,  -,  2, 

2  2 

&c.,  positive  or  negative,  the  arbitrary  quantities  Y  and  c 

f  '  Letters  on  the  Theory  of  Probabilities,'  Letter  XV.  and  Appendix, 
note  pp.  256-266. 


THE  LA  W  OF  ERROR.  443 

being  both  assumed  equal  to  unity,  in  order  to  simplify 
the  calculations.  In  the  same  figure  are  inserted  eleven 
dots,  whose  heights  above  the  base  line  are  proportional 
to  the  numbers  in  the  eleventh  line  of  the  Arithmetical 
Triangle,  thus  representing  the  comparative  probabilities 
of  errors  of  various  amounts  arising  from  ten  equal  causes 
of  error.  It  is  apparent  that  the  correspondence  of  the 
general  and  the  special  Law  of  Error  is  almost  as  close  as 
can  be  exhibited  in  the  figure,  and  the  assumption  of  a 
greater  number  of  equal  causes  of  error  would  render  the 
correspondence  far  more  close. 

It  may  be  explained  that  the  ordinates,  for  instance 
NM,  nm,  n'mf,  represent  values  of  y  in  the  equation  ex 
pressing  the  Law  of  Error.  The  occurrence  of  any  one 
definite  amount  of  error  is  infinitely  improbable,  because 
an  infinite  number  of  such  ordinates  might  be  drawn. 
But  the  probability  of  an  error  occurring  between  certain 
definite  limits  is  finite,  and  is  represented  by  a  portion 
of  the  area  of  the  curve.  Thus  the  probability  that  an 
error,  positive  or  negative,  not  exceeding  unity  will  occur, 
is  represented  by  the  area  MmrmW,  in  short,  by  the  area 
standing  upon  the  line  nn'.  Since  every  observation 
must  either  have  some  definite  error  or  none  at  all,  it 
follows  that  the  whole  area  of  the  curve  should  be  con 
sidered  as  the  unit  expressing  certainty,  and  the  proba 
bility  of  an  error  falling  between  particular  limits  will 
then  be  expressed  by  the  ratio  which  the  area  of  the 
curve  between  those  limits  bears  to  the  whole  area  of 
the  curve. 

Derivation  of  the  Law  of  Error  from  Simple 
Logical  Principles. 

It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  this  Law  of  Error,  abstruse 
though  the  subject  may  seem,  is  really  founded  upon  the 
simplest  principles.  It  arises  entirely  out  of  the  difference 


444  .  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

between  permutations  and  combinations,  a  subject  upon 
which  I  may  seem  to  have  dwelt  with  unnecessary  pro 
lixity  in  previous  pages  (pp.  200-216).  The  order  in 
which  we  add  quantities  together  does  not  affect  the 
amount  of  the  sum,  so  that  if  there  be  three  positive 
and  five  negative  causes  of  error  in  operation,  it  does  not 
matter  in  which  order  they  are  considered  a.s  acting. 
They  may  be  indifferently  intermixed  in  any  arrange 
ment,  and  yet  the  result  will  be  the  same.  The  reader 
should  not  fail  to  notice  how  laws  or  principles  which 
appeared  to  be  absurdly  simple  and  evident  when  first 
noticed,  reappear  in  the  most  complicated  and  mysterious 
processes  of  scientific  method.  The  fundamental  Laws 
of  Identity  and  Difference  gave  rise  to  the  Logical  Abe- 
cedarium,  which,  after  abstracting  the  character  of  the 
differences,  led  to  the  Arithmetical  Triangle  (p.  214). 
The  Law  of  Error  is  defined  by  an  infinitely  high  line 
of  that  triangle,  and  the  law  proves  that  the  mean  is  the 
most  probable  result,  and  that  divergencies  from  the 
mean  become  much  less  probable  as  they  increase  in 
amount.  Now  the  comparative  greatness  of  the  numbers 
towards  the  middle  of  each  line  of  the  Arithmetical 
Triangle  is  entirely  due  to  the  indifference  of  order  in 
space  or  time,  which  was  first  prominently  pointed  out 
as  a  condition  of  logical  relations,  and  the  symbols  in 
dicating  them  (pp.  40-42),  and  which  was  afterwards 
shown  to  attach  equally  to  numerical  symbols,  the  deri 
vatives  of  logical  ferms  (pp.  180,  181). 

Verification  of  the  Law  of  Error. 

The  theory  of  error  which  we  have  been  considering 
rests  entirely  upon  an  assumption,  namely  that  when 
known  sources  of  disturbances  are  allowed  for,  there  yet 
remain  an  indefinite,  possibly  an  infinite  number  of  other 


THE  LA  W  OF  ERROR. 


445 


minute  sources  of  error,  which  will  as  often  produce 
excess  as  deficiency.  Granting  this  assumption,  the  Law 
of  Error  must  be  as  it  is  usually  taken  to  be,  and  there  is 
no  more  need  to  verify  empirically  than  to  test  the  truth 
of  one  of  Euclid's  propositions  mechanically,  after  we  have 
proved  it  theoretically.  Nevertheless,  it  is  an  interesting 
occupation  to  verify  even  the  propositions  of  geometry  in 
an  approximate  manner,  and  it  is  still  more  instructive  to 
inquire  whether  a  large  number  of  observations  will  be 
found  to  justify  our  assumption  of  the  Law  of  Error. 

Encke  has  given  an  excellent  instance  of  the  cor 
respondence  of  theory  with  experience,  in  the  case  of 
certain  observations  of  the  difference  of  Right  Ascension 
of  the  sun  and  two  stars,  namely  a  Aquilas  and  a  Canis 
minoris.  The  observations  were  470  in  number,  and  were 
made  by  Bradley  and  reduced  by  Bessel,  who  found  the 
probable  error  of  the  final  result  to  be  only  about  one- 
fourth  part  of  a  second  (o/f'26^j).  He  then  compared 
the  number  of  errors  of  each  magnitude  from  —  th  part  of 

10 

a  second  upwards,  as  actually  given  by  the  observations, 
with  what  should  occur  according  to  the  Law  of  Error. 
The  results  were  as  follow  #: — 


Magnitude  of  the  errors  in  parts 

Number  of  errors  of  each  magnitude 
according  to 

of  a  second 

Observation. 

Theory. 

O'O    to    O'l 

94 

95 

'I              '2 

88 

89 

•2              -3 

78 

78 

•3       -4 

58 

64 

•4      -5 

51 

50 

•5          '6 

36 

36 

•6          -7 

26 

24 

•7          -8 

H 

:5 

•8         -9 

10 

9 

•9        i-o 

7 

5 

above    ,   I'D 

8 

5 

«  Encke,   '  On  the  Method  of  Least  Squares/  Taylor's  '  Scientific  Me 
moirs,'  vol.  ii.  pp.  338,  339. 


446 


THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 


The  reader  will  remark  that  the  correspondence  is 
remarkably  close,  except  as  regards  larger  errors,  which 
are  excessive  in  practice.  It  is  one  objection,  indeed,  to 
the  theory  of  error,  that,  being  expressed  in  a  continuous 
mathematical  function,  it  contemplates  the  possible  exist 
ence  of  errors  of  every  magnitude,  such  indeed  as  could 
not  practically  occur  ;  yet  in  this  case  the  theory  seems  to 
under-estimate  the  number  of  large  errors. 

Another  excellent  comparison  of  the  law  with  observa 
tion  has  been  made  by  Quetelet,  who  has  investigated  the 
errors  of  487  determinations  in  time  of  the  Right  Ascen- 

o 

sion  of  the  Pole-star,  made  at  Greenwich  during  the  four 
years  1836-39.  These  observations,  although  carefully 
corrected  for  all  known  causes  of  error,  as  well  as  for 
nutation,  precession,  &c.,  are  yet  of  course  found  to  differ, 
and  being  classified  as  regards  intervals  of  one-half  second 
of  time,  and  then  proportionately  increased  in  number,  so 
that  their  sum  may  be  one  thousand,  give  the  following 
results  as  compared  with  what  theory  would  lead  us  to 
expect h  :— 


Magnitude  of 

Number  of  errors 

Magnitude  of 

Number  of  errors 

error  in  tenths 
of  a  second. 

by 

Observation. 

by 

Theory. 

error  in  tenths 
of  a  second. 

by  t 

Observation. 

by 

Theory. 

O'O 

1  68 

163 

— 

— 

— 

+  0-5                      148 

H7 

-o'S 

15° 

152 

+  ro                     129 

112 

—  I'O 

126 

121 

+  1-5                       78 

72 

-i'5 

74 

82 

+  2-0                      33 

40 

—  2'O 

43 

46 

+  2-5 

10 

'9 

-2'5 

25 

22 

+  3-0 

2 

10 

_3-0 

12 

IO 

—                       1  — 

— 

-3'5 

2 

4 

In  this  instance  the  correspondence  is  also  satisfactory, 
but  the  divergence  between  theory  and  fact  is  in  the 
opposite  direction  to  that  discovered  in  the  former  com- 

11  Quetelet,  '  Letters  on  tlie  Theory  of  Probabilities,'  translated  by 
Dowries,  Letter  XIX.  p.  88.  See  also  Galton's  '  Hereditary  Genius,' 
P-  379- 


THE  LA  W  OF  ERROR.  447 

parison,  the  larger  errors  being  less  frequent  than  theory 
would  indicate. 

We  may  also  regard  the  experiments  enumerated  in 
the  chapter  on  Probabilities  (p.  238),  as  forming  an  em 
pirical  verification  of  the  theory  of  error. 

Remarks  on  the  General  Law  of  Error. 

The  mere  fact  that  the  Law  of  Error  allows  of  the 
possible  existence  of  errors  of  every  assignable  amount 
shows  that  it  is  only  approximately  true.  We  may  fairly 
say  that  in  measuring  a  mile  it  would  be  impossible  to 
commit  an  error  of  a  hundred  miles,  and  the  length  of  life 
would  never  allow  of  our  committing  an  error  of  one 
million  miles.  Nevertheless  the  general  Law  of  Error 
would  assign  a  probability  for  an  error  of  that  amount  or 
more,  but  so  small  a  probability  as  to  ba  utterly  incon 
siderable,  and  almost  inconceivable.  All  that  can,  or  in  fact 
need,  be  said  in  defence  of  the  law  is,  that  it  may  be  made 
to  represent  the  errors  in  any  special  case  to  a  very  close 
approximation,  and  that  the  probability  of  large  and  prac 
tically  impossible  errors,  as  given  by  the  law,  will  be  so 
small  as  to  be  entirely  inconsiderable.  And  as  we  are 
dealing  with  error  itself,  and  our  results  pretend  to  no 
thing  more  than  approximation  and  probability,  an  in 
definitely  small  error  in  our  process  of  approximation  is 
of  no  importance  whatever. 

The  Probable  Mean  Result  as  defined  ~by  the  Law 
of  Error. 

One  immediate  result  of  the  Law  of  Error,  as  thus  stated, 
is  that  the  mean  result  is  the  most  probable  one  ;  and 
when  there  is  only  a  single  variable  this  mean  is  found  by 
the  familiar  arithmetical  process.  An  unfortunate  error 


448  THE  PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

has  crept  into  several  works  which  allude  to  this  subject. 
Mr.  Mill,  in  treating  of  the  '  Elimination  of  Chance/  re 
marks  in  a  note l  that  '  the  mean  is  spoken  of  as  if  it  were 
exactly  the  same  thing  with  the  average.  But  the  mean, 
for  purposes  of  inductive  inquiry,  is  not  the  average,  or 
arithmetical  mean,  though  in  a  familiar  illustration  of  the 
theory  the  difference  may  be  disregarded.'  He  goes  on  to 
say  that,  according  to  mathematical  principles,  the  most 
probable  result  is  that  for  which  the  sums  of  the  squares 
of  the  deviations  is  the  least  possible.  In  Bowen's  '  Treatise 
on  Logic'  (p.  439),  we  find  the  Method  of  Least  Squares 
mentioned  as  '  a  mode  of  finding  the  most  probable  result 
in  those  cases  in  which  the  arithmetical  mean  is  not  an 
applicable  expedient  for  determining  the  probability.'  It 
seems  probable  that  these  and  other  writers  were  misled 
by  Dr.  Whe well's  remarks  on  the  subject  ;  for  he  saysk 
that  '  The  Method  of  Least  Squares  is  in  fact  a  Method  of 
Means,  but  with  some  peculiar  characters.  .  .  .  The 
method  proceeds  upon  this  supposition  ;  that  all  errors 
are  not  equally  probable,  but  that  small  errors  are  more 
probable  than  large  ones.'  He  adds  that  this  method 
*  removes  much  that  is  arbitrary  in  the  Method  of  Means.' 
It  is  strange  to  find  a  mathematician  like  Dr.  Whewell 
making  such  remarks,  when  there  is  no  doubt  whatever 
that  the  Method  of  Means  is  only  an  application  of  the 
Method  of  Least  Squares.  They  are,  in  fact,  the  same 
method,  except  that  the  latter  method  may  be  applied  to 
cases  where  two  or  more  quantities  have  to  be  determined 
at  the  same  time.  Many  authorities  might  be  quoted  to 
this  effect,  but  it  will  be  sufficient  to  mention  Lubbock 
and  Drink  water,  who  say  ',  '  If  only  one  quantity  has  to  be 

»  'System  of  Logic,'  bk.  iii.  chap.  17,  §  3.     5th  ed.  vol.  ii.  p.  56. 
k  '  Philosophy  of  the  Inductive  Sciences/  2nd  ed.  vol.  ii.  pp.  408,  409. 
1  '  Essay  on  Probability,'  by  J.  W.  Lubbock  and  J.  E.  Drink\vat  er, 
Useful  Knowledge  Society,  1833,  P-  41- 


THE  LA  W  OF  ERROR. 


determined,  this  method  evidently  resolves  itself  into 
taking  the  mean  of  all  the  values  given  by  observation.' 
Encke,  again,  distinctly  says  m,  that  the  expression  for  the 
probability  of  an  error  'not  only  contains  in  itself  the 
principle  of  the  arithmetical  mean,  but  depends  so  imme 
diately  upon  it,  that  for  all  those  magnitudes  for  which 
the  arithmetical  mean  holds  good  in  the  simple  cases  in 
which  it  is  principally  applied,  no  other  law  of  proba 
bility  can  be  assumed  than  that  which  is  expressed  by 
this  formula/ 

It  can  be  shown,  too,  in  a  moment  that  the  mean  is  the 
result  which  gives  the  least  sum  of  squares  of  errors. 
For  if  a,  b,  c,  &c.,  be  the  results  of  observation  and  x  the 
selected  mean  result,  the  sum  of  squares  of  the  errors  is 
(a— x)2  +  (b  —  x)2  +  (c  —  x)2  +  &c.,  which  is  at  a  minimum 
when  its  differential  coefficient  2  (a  —  x  +  b  — x  +  c—  x  -\- 
&c.)  =  o.  From  this  equation  we  immediately  obtain,  de 
noting  by  n  the  number  of  separate  results,  a,  b,  c,  &c., 
x  =  (a  +  b  +  c  +  . . .  )  -,  or  the  ordinary  arithmetic  mean. 


Weighted  Observations. 

It  is  to  be  distinctly  understood  that  when  we  take  the 
mean  of  certain  numerical  results  as  the  most  probable 
number  aimed  at,  we  regard  all  the  different  results  as 
equally  good  and  probable  in  themselves.  The  theory 
of  error  expresses  no  preference  for  any  one  number  over 
any  other.  If,  then,  an  observer  has  reason  to  suppose 
that  some  results  are  not  so  trustworthy  as  others,  he 
must  take  account  of  this  difference  in  drawing  the  mean. 
By  the  method  of  weighting  observations  this  difference  of 
value  is  easily  allowed  for.  Astronomers  are  in  the  habit 

m  Taylor's  '  Scientific  Memoirs,'  vol.  ii.  p.  333. 
G  g 


450  THE  PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

of  recording  with  an  observation  the  value  or  degree  of 
confidence  with  which  they  regard  it,  freely  estimated 
according  to  the  impression  of  success  or  failure  in  accuracy 
immediately  after  the  observation.  This  value  is  usually 
expressed  in  a  decimal  scale,  so  that  10  denotes  the 
highest  degree  of  satisfaction  with  the  result,  and  I  the 
least  degree.  Before  taking  the  mean  of  the  observations 
each  number  is  multiplied  by  its  weight  or  value,  and  the 
sum  of  the  products  is  divided  by  the  sum  of  the  weights. 
Thus  if  a,  b,  c,  &c.,  be  the  observed  numbers,  arid  w,  w  ,  iv", 
&c.,  the  weights,  then  the  most  probable  mean  is 

cw"  +  .  .  .  .       ,„,  .      „  ,       .         .,,    ,  ,     . 

71  —  TT-T        —'     -Lhis  formula,  it  will  be  observed,  is 
+w  +  .  .  .  . 


identical  in  form  with  that  for  finding  the  centre  of 
gravity  of  particles  of  different  weights  arranged  in  a 
straight  line.  When  we  regard  w,  w',  ID"  ,  &c.,  as  all  equal, 
it  becomes  identical  with  the  formula  for  the  ordinary 
mean.  This  method  of  weighting  observations,  now  of 
much  importance  in  astronomical  and  other  very  exactly 
quantitative  investigations,  appears  to  have  been  first  pro 
posed  by  Roger  Cotes,  the  editor  of  the  '  Principia/  as 
pointed  out  «by  De  Morgan11. 

The  practice  of  giving  weights  would  open  the  way  to 
much  error  and  abuse,  if  the  weights  were  assigned  when 
the  mean  was  being  drawn,  and  when  the  divergence  of 
some  results  from  the  others  would  be  likely  to  become 
the  guide.  As  a  general  rule  the  weights  must  be  as 
signed  at  the  moment  of  observation,  and  afterwards 
rigidly  maintained,  and  they  must  be  assigned  not  from 
regard  to  the  apparent  intrinsic  accuracy  of  the  result, 
but  the  extrinsic  circumstances  which  seem  to  render  it 
valuable.  .  An  observed  result,  in  short,  must  be  discre 
dited,  not  because  it  is  divergent,  but  because  there  were 
other  reasons  to  suppose  that  it  would  be  divergent. 

n  '  Penny  Cyclopsedia,'  art.  Least  Squares, 


THE  LA  W  OF  Eli  ROB.  451 

The  Probable  Error  of  Mean  Results. 

When  we  draw  any  conclusion  from  the  numerical 
results  of  observations  we  ought  not  to  consider  it  suf 
ficient,  in  cases  of  importance,  to  content  ourselves  with 
finding  the  simple  mean  and  treating  it  as  true.  We 
ought  also  to  ascertain  what  is  the  degree  of  confidence 
we  may  place  in  this  mean,  and  our  confidence  should  be 
measured  by  the  degree  of  concurrence  of  the  observations 
from  which  it  is  derived.  In  some  cases  the  mean  may 
be  so  close  to  the  correct  result  that  we  may  consider  it 
as  approximately  certain  and  accurate.  In  other  cases  it 
may  really  be  worth  little  or  nothing.  The  Law  of  Error 
enables  us  to  give  exact  expression  to  the  degree  of  con 
fidence  proper  in  any  case  ;  for  it  shows  how  to  calculate 
the  probability  of  a  divergence  of  any  amount  from  the 
mean,  and  we  can  thence  ascertain  the  probability  that 
the  mean  in  question  is  within  a  certain  distance  from  the 
true  number.  The  probable  error  is  taken  by  mathema 
ticians  to  mean  the  limits  within  which  it  is  as  likely  as 
not  that  the  truth  will  fall.  Thus  if  5 -4 5  be  the  mean  of 
all  the  determinations  of  the  density  of  the  earth,  and  -20 
be  approximately  the  probable  error,  the  meaning  is  that 
the  probability  of  the  real  density  of  the  earth  falling  be 
tween  5*25  and  5-65  is  ^.  Any  other  limits  might  have 
been  selected  at  will.  We  might  readily  calculate  the  limits 
within  which  it  was  one  hundred  or  one  thousand  to  one 
that  the  truth  would  fall ;  but  there  is  a  general  conven 
tion  to  take  the  even  odds,  one  to  one,  as  the  quantity  of 
probability  of  which  the  limits  are  to  be  estimated. 

Many  books  on  the  subject  of  probability  give  rules  for 
making  the  calculations,  but  as,  in  the  gradual  progress  of 
science,  all  persons  ought  to  be  more  familiar  with  these 
processes,  I  propose  to  repeat  the  rules  here  and  illustrate 
their  use.  The  calculations,  when  made  in  strict  accordance 
with  the  directions,  involve  none  but  arithmetic  operation?. 


452  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

Rules  for  finding  the  probable  error  of  a  mean  result  :— 

1 .  Draw  the  mean  of  all  the  observed  results. 

2.  Find  the  excess  or  defect,  that  is,  the  error  of  each 
result  from  the  mean. 

3.  Square  each  of  these  reputed  errors. 

4.  Add  together  all  these  squares  of  the  errors. 

5.  Take  the  square  root  of  this  sum. 

6.  Divide  the  square  root  by  the  number  of  results. 

7.  Multiply   the    quotient    by    0*67449    (or   approxi 
mately   by   0*674,    or    even    o-67),    a    natural    constant 
number  derived    from  the  Law  of  Error   in   a   manner 
which    is    described   in    mathematical   works    upon    the 
subject. 

Suppose,  for  instance,  that  five  measurements  of  the 
height  of  a  hill,  by  the  barometer  or  otherwise,  have  given 
the  numbers  of  feet  as  293,  301,  306,  307,  313  ;  we  want 
to  know  the  probable  error  of  the  mean,  namely  304.  Now 
the  differences  between  this  mean  and  the  above  numbers, 
paying  no  regard  to  direction,  are  n,  3,  2,  3,  9;  their 
squares  are  121,  9,  4,  9,  81,  and  the  sum  of  the  squares 
consequently  224.  Taking  the  square  root  of  this  sum  by 
the  common  arithmetic  process,  or  by  logarithms,  we  ob 
tain  14*966,  and  dividing  by  five,  the  number  of  observa 
tions,  we  have  2*99,  which  has  only  to  be  multiplied  by 
•67  to  yield  us  2*019.  This  number  is  so  close  to  2,  that 
we  may  call  the  probable  error  equal  to  two.  Thus  the 
probability  is  one-half,  or  the  odds  are  even,  that  the  true 
height  of  the  mountain  lies  between  302  and  306  feet. 
We  have  thus  an  exact  measure  of  the  degree  of  credibility 
of  our  mean  result,  which  mean  indicates  the  most  likely 
point  for  the  truth  to  fall  upon. 

The  reader  should  observe  that  as  the  object  in  these 
calculations  is  only  to  gain  a  notion  of  the  degree  of  con 
fidence  with  which  we  view  the  mean,  there  is  no  real 
use  in  carrying  the  calculations  to  any  great  degree  of 


THE   LAW  OF  ERROR.  453 

precision ;  and  whenever  the  neglecting  of  decimal  frac 
tions,  or  even  the  slight  alteration  of  a  number  will  much 
abbreviate  the  computations,  it  may  be  fearlessly  done,  ex 
cept  in  cases  of  high  importance  and  precision.  It  has  been 
stated  that  the  voyages  of  the  Great  Britain  steamship  to 
Melbourne  from  Liverpool,  up  to  May,  1871,  have  been 
thirteen  in  number,  with  the  following  durations  in  days : 
62,  63,  59,  60,  58,  61,  57,  57,  57,  57,  56,  63,  55.  The 
mean  duration  of  the  voyages  is  58*85  days,  which  is  the 
most  probable  length  of  any  similar  future  voyage ;  but 
to  calculate  the  probable  error,  we  may  take  the  mean  to 
be  59  days.  The  sum  of  the  squares  of  the  errors  is  only 
88,  and  the  probable  error  thence  calculated  0*49  day,  or, 
say  half  a  day.  It  is  as  likely  as  not,  then,  that  any  par 
ticular  voyage  will  be  not  less  than  58 J  days,  nor  more 
than  59^  days. 

The  experiments  of  Benzenberg  to  detect  the  revolution 
of  the  earth,  by  the  deviation  of  a  ball  from  the  exact 
perpendicular  line  in  falling  down  a  deep  pit,  have  been 
cited  by  Encke0  as  an  interesting  illustration  of  the  Law 
of  Error.  The  mean  deviation  was  5*086  lines,  and  its 
probable  error  was  calculated  by  Encke  to  be  not  more 
than  '950  line,  that  is,  the  odds  were  even  that  the  true 
result  lay  between  4- 136  and  6'O36.  As  the  deviation 
should,  according  to  astronomical  theory  be  4*6  lines, 
which  lies  well  within  the  limits,  we  may  consider  that 
the  experiments  are  consistent  with  the  Copernican  system 
of  the  universe. 

It  will  of  course  be  understood  that  the  probable  error 
has  regard  only  to  the  differences  of  the  results  from 
which  the  mean  is  drawn,  and  takes  no  account  of  con 
stant  errors.  The  true  result  accordingly  will  often  fall 
far  beyond  the  limits  of  probable  error. 

0  Taylor's  'Scientific  Memoirs,'  vol.  ii.  pp.  330,  347,  &c. 


454  THE   PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

The  Rejection  of  the  Mean  Result. 

We  ought  always  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  mean  of  any 
series  of  observations  is  the  best,  that  is,  the  most  probable 
approximation  to  the  truth,  only  in  the  entire  absence  of 
any  knowledge  to  the  contrary.  The  selection  of  the 
mean  rests  entirely  upon  the  probability  that  wholly  un 
known  causes  of  error  will  in  the  long  run  fall  as  often  in 
one  direction  as  the  opposite,  so  that  in  drawing  the  mean 
they  will  balance  each  other.  If  we  have  any  presumption 
to  the  contrary,  any  reason  to  suppose  that  there  exists  a 
tendency  to  error  in  one  direction  rather  than  the  other, 
then  to  choose  the  mean  would  be  to  ignore  that  tendency. 
Thus  we  may  certainly  approximate  to  the  length  of  the 
circumference  of  a  circle,  by  measuring  the  perimeters  of 
inscribed  and  circumscribed  polygons  of  an  equal  and  large 
number  of  sides.  The  correct  length  of  the  circular  line 
undoubtedly  lies  between  the  lengths  of  the  two  perimeters, 
but  it  does  not  follow  that  the  mean  is  the  best  approxi 
mation.  It  may  in  fact  be  shown  upon  mathematical 
principles  that  the  circumference  of  the  circle  is  very 
nearly  equal  to  the  perimeter  of  the  inscribed  polygon, 
together  with  one-third  part  of  the  difference  between 
the  inscribed  and  circumscribed  polygons  of  the  same 
number  of  sides.  Having  this  knowledge  we  ought  of 
course  to  act  upon  it,  instead  of  upon  vague  grounds  of 
probability. 

We  may  often  perceive  that  a  series  of  measurements 
tends  towards  an  extreme  limit  rather  than  towards  a 
mean.  Thus  in  endeavouring  to  obtain  a  correct  estimate 
of  the  apparent  diameter  of  the  brightest  fixed  stars,  we 
should  find  a  continuous  diminution  in  estimates  as  the 
powers  of  observation  increased.  Kepler  assigned  to 
Sirius  an  apparent  diameter  of  240  seconds  ;  Tycho  Brahe 
made  it  126;  Gassendi  10  seconds;  Galileo,  Hevelius, 


THE  LAW  OF  ERROR.  455 

and  J.  Cassini,  5  or  6  seconds.  Halley,  Michell,  and 
subsequently  Sir  W.  Herschel  came  to  the  conclusion 
that  the  brightest  stars  in  the  heavens  could  not  have 
real  discs  of  a  second,  and  were  probably  much  less  in 
diameter.  It  would  of  course  be  absurd  to  take  the  mean 
of  quantities  which  differ  more  than  240  times ;  and  as 
the  tendency  has  always  been  to  smaller  estimates,  there 
is  a  considerable  indication  in  favour  of  the  smallest?. 

In  the  case  of  many  experiments  and  measurements  we 
shall  know  on  which  side  there  is  a  tendency  to  error. 
Thus  the  readings  of  a  thermometer  always  tend  to  rise  as 
the  age  of  the  instrument  increases,  and  no  drawing  of 
means  will  correct  this  result.  "Barometers,  on  the  other 
hand,  are  always  likely  to  read  too  low  instead  of  too  high, 
owing  to  the  imperfection  of  the  vacuum,  or  the  action  of 
capillary  attraction.  If  the  mercury  be  perfectly  pure  and 
no  considerable  error  be  due  to  the  measuring  apparatus, 
the  best  barometer  will  be  that  which  gives  the  highest 
result. 

When  we  have  reasonable  grounds  for  supposing  that 
certain  experimental  results  are  liable  to  grave  errors,  we 
should  exclude  them  in  drawing  a  mean.  If  we  want  to 
find  the  most  probable  approximation  to  the  velocity  of 
sound  in  air,  it  would  be  absurd  to  go  back  to  the  old 
experiments  which  made  the  velocity  from  1200  to  1474 
feet  per  second ;  for  we  know  that  the  old  observers  did 
not  guard  against  errors  arising  from  wind  and  other 
causes.  Old  chemical  experiments  are  absolutely  valueless 
as  regards  quantitative  results.  The  old  chemists  found 
the  atmosphere  to  differ  in  composition  nearly  ten  per 
cent,  in  different  places,  whereas  modern  accurate  experi 
menters  find  very  slight  variations.  Any  method  of 
measurement  which  we  know  to  avoid  a  source  of  error 
is  far  to  be  preferred  to  others  which  trust  to  probabilities 

r  Quetelet,  'Letters/  &c.  p.  116. 


456  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

for  the  elimination  of  the  error.  As  Flamsteed  says  %  '  OIK 
good  instrument  is  of  as  much  worth  as  a  hundred  in 
different  ones.'  But  an  instrument  is  good  or  bad  only  ir, 
a  comparative  sense,  and  no  instrument  gives  invariable 
and  truthful  results.  Hence  we  must  always  ultimately 
fall  back  upon  general  probabilities  for  the  selection  of  the 
final  mean,  when  our  other  precautions  are  exhausted. 

Very  difficult  questions  sometimes  arise  when  one  or 
more  results  of  a  method  of  experiment  diverge  widely 
from  the  mean  of  the  rest.  Are  we  or  are  we  not  to  ex 
clude  them  in  adopting  the  supposed  true  mean  result  of 
the  method.  The  drawing  of  a  mean  result  rests,  as  I 
have  frequently  explained,  upon  the  assumption  that  every 
error  acting  in  one  direction  will  probably  be  balanced  by 
other  errors  acting  in  an  opposite  direction.  If  then  we 
know  or  can  possibly  discover  any  causes  of  error  not 
agreeing  with  this  assumption,  we  shall  be  justified  in 
excluding  results  which  seem  to  be  affected  by  this  cause. 

In  reducing  large  series  of  astronomical  observations,  it  is 
not  uncommon  to  meet  with  numbers  differing  from  others 
by  a  whole  degree  or  half  a  degree,  or  some  considerable  in 
tegral  quantity.  These  are  errors  which  could  hardly  arise 
in  the  act  of  observation  or  in  instrumental  irregularity ; 
but  they  might  readily  be  accounted  for  by  misreading 
of  figures  or  mistaking  of  division  marks.  It  would  be 
absurd  to  trust  to  chance  that  such  mistakes  would 
balance  each  other  in  the  long  run,  and  it  is  therefore 
better  to  correct  arbitrarily  the  supposed  mistake,  or 
better  still,  if  new  observations  can  be  made,  to  strike 
out  the  divergent  numbers  altogether.  When  results 
come  sometimes  too  great  or  too  small  in  a  regular 
manner,  we  should  suspect  that  some  part  of  the  instru 
ment  slips  through  a  definite  space,  or  that  a  definite 
cause  of  error  enters  at  times,  and  not  at  others.  We 
<i  Baily,  '  Account  of  Flamstced/  p.  56. 


THE   LAW  OF  ERROR.  457 

should  then  make  it  a  point  of  prime  importance  to  dis 
cover  the  exact  nature  and  amount  of  such  an  error,  and 
either  prevent  its  occurrence  for  the  future  or  else  intro 
duce  a  corresponding  correction.  In  many  researches  the 
whole  difficulty  will  consist  in  this  detection  and  avoidance 
of  sources  of  error.  Thus  Professor  Koscoe  found  that  the 
presence  of  phosphorus  caused  serious  and  almost  una 
voidable  errors  in  the  determination  of  the  atomic  weight 
of  vanadium1".  Sir  John  Herschel,  in  reducing  his  obser 
vations  of  double  stars  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  was 
perplexed  by  an  unaccountable  difference  of  the  angles  of 
position  as  measured  by  the  Seven-feet  Equatorial  and 
the  Twenty-feet  Eeflector  Telescopes,  and  after  a  careful 
investigation  was  obliged  to  be  contented  with  introducing 
a  correction  experimentally  determined8. 

Even  the  most  patient  and  exhaustive  investigations 
will  sometimes  fail  to  disclose  any  reason  why  some  results 
diverge  in  an  unusual  and  unexpected  manner  from  others. 
The  question  again  recurs — Are  we  arbitrarily  to  exclude 
them  "?  The  answer  should  be  in  the  negative  as  a  general 
rule.  The  mere  fact  of  divergence  ought  not  to  be  taken 
as  conclusive  against  a  result,  and  the  exertion  of  arbitrary 
choice  would  open  the  way  to  the  most  fatal  influence  of 
bias,  and  what  is  commonly  known  as  the  'cooking'  of 
figures.  It  would  amount  in  most  cases  to  judging  fact 
by  theory  instead  of  theory  by  fact.  The  apparently 
divergent  number  may  even  prove  in  time  to  be  the  true 
one.  It  may  be  an  exception  of  that  peculiarly  valuable 
kind  which  upsets  our  false  theories,  a  real  exception,  ex 
ploding  apparent  coincidences,  arid  opening  the  way  to  a 
wholly  new  view  of  the  subject.  To  establish  this  position 
for  the  divergent  fact  will  of  course  require  additional  re 
search  ;  but  in  the  meantime  we  should  give  it  a  fair 

r  Bakerian  Lecture,  '  Philosophical  Transactions'  (1868),  vol.  clviii.  p.  6. 
8  '  Results  of  Observations  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope/  p.  283. 


458  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

weight  in  our  mean  conclusions,  and  should  bear  in  mind 
the  discrepancy  as  one  demanding  attention.  To  neglect 
a  divergent  result  is  to  neglect  the  possible  clue  to  a  great 
discovery. 

Method  of  Least  Squares. 

When  two  or  more  unknown  quantities  are  so  involved 
that  they  cannot  be  separately  determined  by  the  single 
Method  of  Means,  we  can  yet  obtain  their  most  probable 
amounts  by  the  Method  of  Least  Squares,  without  more 
difficulty  than  arises  from  the  length  of  the  arithmetical 
computations.  If  the  result  of  each  observation  gives  an 
equation  between  two  unknown  quantities  of  the  form 

ax  +  l>y  =  c 

then,  if  the  observations  were  free  from  error,  we  should 
only  need  two  observations  giving  two  equations ;  but, 
for  the  attainment  of  greater  accuracy,  we  may  take  a 
series  of  observations,  and  then  reduce  the  equations  so 
as  to  give  only  a  pair  with  average  coefficients.  This  re 
daction  is  effected  by,  firstly,  multiplying  the  coefficients 
of  each  equation  by  the  first  coefficient,  and  adding  to 
gether  all  the  similar  coefficients  thus  resulting  for  the 
coefficients  of  a  new  equation  ;  and  secondly,  by  repeating 
this  process,  and  multiplying  the  coefficients  of  each  equa 
tion  by  the  coefficient  of  the  second  term.  Thus  meaning 
by  (sum  of  a2)  the  sum  of  all  quantities  of  the  same  kind, 
and  having  the  same  place  in  the  equations  as  a2,  we 
may  briefly  describe  the  two  resulting  mean  equations 
as  follows  :— 

(sum  of  a"'}  .  x  +  (sum  of  «?>)  .  y  =  (sum  of  ac), 
(sum  of  ctb]  .  x  +  (sum  of  &2)  .  y  —  (sum  of  be]. 

When  there  are  three  or  more  unknown  quantities  the 
process  is  exactly  the  same  in  nature,  and  we  only  need 
additional  mean  equations  to  be  obtained  by  multiply 
ing  by  the  third,  fourth,  &c.,  coefficients.  As  the  numbers 


THE  LAW  OF  ERROR.  459 

are  in  any  case  only  approximate,  it  is  usually  quite  un 
necessary  to  make  the  computations  with  any  great 
degree  of  accuracy,  and  places  of  decimals  may  therefore 
oe  freely  cut  oif  to  save  arithmetical  work.  The  mean 
equations  having  been  computed,  their  solution  by  the 
ordinary  methods  of  algebra  gives  the  most  probable 
values  of  the  unknown  quantities. 

Works  upon  the  Theory  of  Probability  and  the  Law 

of  Error. 

Regarding  the  Theory  of  Probability  and  the  Law  of 
Error  as  constituting,  perhaps,  the  most  important  subjects 
of  study  for  any  one  who  desires  to  obtain  a  complete 
comprehension  of  logical  and  scientific  method  as  actually 
applied  in  physical  investigations,  I  will  briefly  indicate 
the  works  in  one  or  other  of  which  the  reader  will  best 
pursue  the  study. 

The  best  popular,  and  at  the  same  time  profound 
English  work  on  the  subject  is  De  Morgan's  '  Essay  on 
Probabilities  and  on  their  Application  to  Life  Contin 
gencies  and  Insurance  Offices/  published  in  the  '  Cabinet 
Cyclopedia/  and  to  be  obtained  from  Messrs.  Longman. 
No  mathematical  knowledge  beyond  that  of  common 
arithmetic  is  required  in  reading  this  work.  Quetelet's 
'  Letters/  already  often  referred  to,  also  form  a  most  inter 
esting  and  excellent  popular  introduction  to  the  subject, 
and  the  mathematical  notes  are  also  of  value.  Sir  George 
Airv's  brief  treatise  '  On  the  Algebraical  and  Numerical 

•/  O 

Theory  of  Errors  of  Observation  and  the  Combination  of 
Observations/  contains  a  complete  explanation  of  the  Law  of 
Error  and  its  practical  applications.  De  Morgan's  treatise 
'  On  the  Theory  of  Probabilities'  in  the  '  Encyclopaedia  Me- 
tropolitana/  presents  an  abstract  of  the  more  abstruse  in 
vestigations  of  Laplace,  together  with  a  multitude  of  pro- 


460  THE  PRINCIPLES   OF  SCIENCE. 

found  and  original  remarks  concerning  the  theory  generally. 
In  Lubbock  and  Drinkwater's  work  on  '  Probability,'  in  the 
Library  of  Useful  Knowledge,  we  have  a  very  concise  but 
good  statement  of  a  number  of  important  problems.  The 
Rev.  W.  A.  Whitworth  has  given,  in  an  interesting  little 
work  entitled  '  Choice  and  Chance,'  a  number  of  good  illus 
trations  of  the  calculations  both  in  the  theories  of  Com 
binations  and  Probabilities.  In  Mr.  Todhunter's  admirable 
History  we  have  an  exhaustive  critical  account  of  almost  all 
writings  upon  the  subject  of  probability  down  to  the  cul 
mination  of  the  theory  in  Laplace's  works.  In  spite  of  the 
existence  of  these  and  some  other  good  English  works,  there 
seems  to  be  a  want  of  an  easy  and  yet  pretty  complete 
introduction  to  the  study  of  the  theory  of  probabilities. 

Among  French  works  the  '  Traite  Elementaire  du  Cal- 
cul  des  Probabilites/  by  S.  F.  Lacroix,  of  which  several 
editions  have  been  published,  and  which  is  not  difficult 
to  obtain,  forms  probably  the  best  elementary  treatise. 
Poisson's  '  Eecherches  sur  la  Probabilite  des  Jugements,' 
(Paris,  1837),  commences  with  an  admirable  investigation 
of  the  grounds  and  methods  of  the  theory.  While  La 
place's  great  '  Theorie  Analytique  des  Probabilites '  is  of 
course  the  '  Principia'  of  the  subject,  his  'Essai  Philo- 
sophique  sur  les  Probabilites '  is  a  popular  discourse,  and 
is  one  of  the  most  profound  and  interesting  essays  ever 
published.  It  should  be  familiar  to  every  student  of 
logical  method,  and  has  lost  little  or  none  of  its  import 
ance  by  lapse  of  time. 

Detection  of  Constant  Errors. 

The  Method  of  Means  is  absolutely  incapable  of  elimi 
nating  any  error  which  is  always  the  same,  and  which 
always  lies  in  one  direction.  We  sometimes  require  to  be 
aroused  from  a  false  feeling  of  security,  and  to  be  urged 


THE  LAW  OF  ERROR.  461 

to  take  suitable  precautions  against  such  occult  errors. 
'  It  is  to  the  observer/  says  Gauss*,  'that  belongs  the  task 
of  carefully  removing  the  causes  of  constant  errors,'  and 
this  is  quite  true  when  the  error  is  absolutely  constant. 
When  we  have  made  a  number  of  determinations  with  a 
certain  apparatus  or  method  of  measurement,  there  is  a 
great  advantage  in  altering  the  arrangement,  or  even 
devising  some  entirely  different  method  of  getting  esti 
mates  of  the  same  quantity.  The  reason  obviously  con 
sists  in  the  improbability  that  exactly  the  same  constant 
error  will  affect  two  or  more  different  methods  of  experi 
ment.  If  a  discrepancy  is  found  to  exist,  we  shall  at 
least  be  aware  of  the  existence  of  error,  and  can  take 
measures  for  finding  in  which  way  it  lies.  If  we  can  try 
a  considerable  number  of  methods,  the  probability  becomes 
considerable  that  errors  constant  in  one  method  will  be 
balanced  or  nearly  so  by  errors  of  an  opposite  effect  in  the 
others.  Suppose  that  there  be  three  different  methods 
each  affected  by  an  error  of  equal  amount.  The  pro 
bability  that  this  error  wiU  in  all  fall  in  the  same  direction 
is  only  ^  ;  and  with  four  methods  similarly  f .  If  each 
method  be  affected,  as  is  always  the  case  by  several  inde 
pendent  sources  of  error,  the  probability  becomes  very 
great  that  in  the  mean  result  of  all  the  methods  some  of 
the  errors  will  partially  compensate  the  others.  In  this  case, 
as  in  all  others,  when  human  foresight  and  vigilance  has 
exhausted  itself,  we  must  trust  the  theory  of  probability. 
In  the  determination  of  a  zero  point,  of  the  magnitude 
of  the  fundamental  standards  of  time  and  space,  in  the 
personal  equation  of  an  astronomical  observer,  we  have 
instances  of  such  fixed  errors  ;  but  as  a  general  rule  a 
change  of  procedure  is  likely  to  reverse  the  character  of 
the  error,  and  many  instances  may  be  given  of  the  value 
of  this  precaution. 

t  Gauss,  translated  by  Bertram!,  p.  25. 


4 02  THE   PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE. 

If  we  measure  over  and  over  again  the  same  angular 
magnitude  by  the  same  divided  circle,  maintained  in 
exactly  the  same  position,  it  is  evident  that  the  same 
mark  in  the  circle  will  be  the  criterion  in  each  case,  and 
any  error  in  the  position  of  that  mark  will  equally  affect 
all  our  results.  But  if  in  each  measurement  we  use  a 
different  part  of  the  circle,  a  new  mark  will  come  into  use, 
and  as  the  error  of  each  mark  can  hardly  be  in  the  same 
direction,  the  average  result  will  be  nearly  free  from 
errors  of  division.  It  will  be  still  better  to  use  more 
than  one  divided  circle. 

Even  when  we  have  no  clear  perception  of  the  points  of 
our  apparatus  at  which  fixed  error  is  likely  to  enter,  we 
may  with  advantage  vary  the  construction  of  our  appa 
ratus  with  the  hope  that  we  shall  accidentally  detect 
some  latent  imperfection.  Baily's  purpose  in  repeating 
the  experiments  of  Michell  and  Cavendish  on  the  density 
of  the  earth,  was  not  merely  to  follow  the  same  course 
and  verify  the  previous  numbers,  but  to  try  whether 
variations  in  the  size  and  substance  of  the  attracting 
balls,  the  mode  of  suspension,  the  temperature  of  the  sur 
rounding  air,  &c.,  would  yield  different  results.  He  per 
formed  no  less  than  62  distinct  series,  comprising  2153 
experiments,  and  he  carefully  classified  and  discussed  the 
results  so  as  to  disclose  the  utmost  differences.  Again,  in 
experimenting  upon  the  resistance  of  the  air  to  the  mo 
tion  of  a  pendulum,  Baily  employed  no  less  than  80 
pendulums  of  various  forms  and  materials,  in  order  to 
ascertain  exactly  upon  what  conditions  the  resistance  de 
pends.  Regnault,  in  his  exact  researches  upon  the  dilata 
tion  of  gases  made  arbitrary  changes  in  the  magnitude  of 
parts  of  his  apparatus.  He  thinks  that  if,  in  spite  of  such 
modification  the  results  are  unchanged,  the  errors  are 
probably  of  inconsiderable  amount";  but  in  reality  it  is 

11  Jamin,  '  Cours  cle  Physique,'  vol.  ii.  p.  60. 


THE  LA  W  OF  ERROR.  463 

always  possible,  and  usually  likely,  that  we  overlook 
sources  of  error  which  a  future  generation  will  detect. 
Thus  the  pendulum  experiments  of  Baily  and  Sabine 
were  directed  to  ascertain  the  nature  and  amount  of  a 
correction  for  air  resistance,  which  had  been  entirely  mis 
understood  in  the  experiments  upon  which  was  founded 
the  definition  of  the  standard  yard,  by  means  of  the 
seconds  pendulum  in  the  Act  of  5th  George  IV.  c.  74. 
It  has  already  been  mentioned  that  a  considerable  error 
was  discovered  in  the  determination  of  the  standard 
metre  as  the  ten-millionth  part  of  the  distance  from  the 
pole  to  the  equator  (p.  368). 

We  shall  return  in  the  second  volume  to  the  further 
consideration  of  the  methods  by  which  we  may  as  far  as 
possible  secure  ourselves  against  permanent  and  undetected 
sources  of  error.  In  the  meantime,  having  completed  the 
consideration  of  the  special  methods  requisite  for  treating 
quantitative  phenomena,  we  must  return  to  our  principal 
subject,  and  endeavour  to  trace  out  the  course  by  which 
the  physicist,  from  observation  and  experiment,  collects 
the  materials  of  natural  knowledge,  and  then  proceeds 
by  hypothesis  and  inverse  calculation  to  educe  from  them 
the  laws  of  nature. 


END    OF    THE    FIRST    VOLUME. 


887 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


P&ASci.