LINCOLN BIBLE INSTITUTE 


LINCOLN BIBLE IN 
se hated: 


f 
(bs 
Vee 


ie. ae 


MECHANISM, LIFE 
AND PERSONALITY 


AN EXAMINATION OF THE MECHANISTIC 
THEORY OF LIFE AND MIND 


BY 


J. S. HALDANE, M.D., LL.D., F.R.S. 


FELLOW OF NEW COLLEGE, UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD 


SECOND EDITION 


NEW YORK 
E. P. DUTTON AND COMPANY 
1923 


Printed in Great Britain by T, and A. ConsTasLe Lrp, 
at the University Press, Edinburgh 


\\\ 
WIB 


PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION 


Tuis book consists of four lectures which 
were delivered in the Physiological Labora- 
tory of Guy’s Hospital, during May of this 
year, as a London University course for 
senior students. They are reproduced in the 
form of their delivery, after careful revision, 
in which I have been much aided by the 
criticisms and suggestions of my friend 
Professor J. T. Wilson, F.R.S. 
Philosophical readers who may have chanced 
to see an essay by my brother and myself on 
‘The Relations of Philosophy to Science’ in 
Essays in Philosophical Criticism, published in 
1883, will recognise in these lectures a de- 
velopment of the ideas put forward in that 
essay. In a presidential address which I 
delivered in 1908 before the Physiological 
Section of the British Association, and in 
other scattered papers, the same line of argu- 
ment in relation to the aims of biology and 
its position among the sciences was followed 


out in certain directions. The lectures now 
10308 v 


vi PREFACE 


published represent an attempt at a more 
comprehensive treatment of the subject. 

The time is now more than ripe for bring- 
ing the great biological movement of the 
nineteenth century into definite relation with 
the main stream of human thought; and 
these lectures form a contribution towards 
the fulfilment of this task. 


PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION 


In the present edition I have entirely recast 
the fourth lecture, which deals with Person- 
ality. The subject is of supreme human 
interest, but proportionally difficult. Further 
reading and thought have brought to me 
additional light upon it, and I trust that in 
its new form the fourth lecture will be corre- 
spondingly clearer to others. 

Except for one or two slight emendations 
the other three lectures are unaltered. If 
any readers wish to follow out in detail the 
application in physiology of the ideas formu- 
lated in the third lecture, I may perhaps refer 
them to my Silliman Lectures (now in the 
Press) on the Physiology of Respiration. 


Oxrorb. 


CONTENTS 


LECTURE I 

PAGE 

Tue Mecnanistic THEory or Lirk, . = 7 1 
LECTURE II 

Criticism or THE MeEcuHANisTic THEory, A A 31 


LECTURE III 


BroLogy AND THE PuysicaL ScIENCES, , : : 66 
LECTURE IV 
PERSONALITY, ‘ = ; ; ; s - 106 


vii 


LECTURE I 
THE MECHANISTIC THEORY OF LIFE 


THE aim of the first two of these lectures is to 
examine the hypothesis that living organisms 
may be regarded as conscious or unconscious 
physical and chemical mechanisms, and can 
be satisfactorily investigated from this stand- 
point. In this first lecture I shall endeavour 
to state, as well as I can, the case for what 
may be called, in the absence of a better 
expression, the mechanistic theory of life. 
The researches of countless investigators 
have established with practical unanimity 
certain very fundamental facts with regard to 
living organisms. One of these is that the 
matter of which the bodies of organisms are 
found by analysis to be composed consists 
of the same chemical elements as are 
found outside the body, and that no new 
matter is formed in the body, or disappears 
A 


2 THE MECHANISTIC THEORY OF LIFE 


from it. All the matter which is found 
in the body, or which passes from it, can 
be accounted for by what is taken up 
from the environment. Of the particular 
chemical substances, moreover, which have 
been found in the body a large and ever 
increasing number can be formed artificially 
outside it, and there is no reason for believing 
that any ultimate difficulty will be experi- 
enced in artificially forming any of the 
chemical substances which have been dis- 
covered, or are ever likely to be discovered, 
within the body. 

Another fundamental fact is that the whole 
of the energy which is liberated in the body, 
whether as heat, mechanical work, or in other 
forms, can be traced to sources outside the 
body. The actual external sources of energy 
in the living body were first pointed out in 
general terms by Mayer more than sixty 
years ago, and the exact investigations of 
subsequent physiologists have completely 
verified his general conclusions. 

The two great physical laws of conservation 
of matter and conservation of energy can 
thus be extended with apparently rigorous 


rt 


MATTER, ENERGY AND LIFE 3 


accuracy to all living organisms, including 
human beings. From this it may be inferred 
that, however complex may be the changes 
involved in organic activity, they are nothing 
but changes in a material system. As yet 
we are far from being able to trace this 
system and its changes completely ; but the 
main outlines are clear, and the gradual filling 
in of details can only be a matter of time, 
though we shall probably never succeed in 
completely filling in all the details. 

It is true that, in the case of at least the 
higher organisms, consciousness accompanies 
some of the material changes in the living 
body, whereas consciousness is not known 
to accompany material changes in the in- 
organic world. Of this mysterious accom- 
paniment we can of course give no physical 
account. Possibly consciousness accompanies 
all material change; but whether or not this 
is the case, consciousness seems to make no 
difference in the end to the physical and 
chemical chain of events. It might, con- 
ceivably, be a form of energy, generated 
under certain unknown conditions in active 
protoplasm ; but, if so, it is only one form 


4 THE MECHANISTIC THEORY OF LIFE 


of energy, generated from and immediately 
passing back into other forms. Cut off the 
oxygen supply to the brain, and conscious- 
ness ceases within a few seconds. It makes 
no difference to the energy balance of the 
body whether an animal is conscious or not; 
and it seems simplest, in the present state of 
knowledge, to treat consciousness as an ac- 
companiment, not altering in any way the 
physical and chemical changes which it 
accompanies, of certain intra-protoplasmic 
changes. 

The mechanistic theory may be supported 
by another set of considerations, which appeal 
very strongly to many scientific investigators. 
In all biological investigations we are investi- 
gating either structure or activity; and when 
we come to details we find that the struc- 
ture is physical and chemical structure, and 
the activity physical and chemical activity. 
Hence biology can be nothing but the physics 
and chemistry of organisms. 

This argument may be illustrated in almost 
infinite detail. Let us suppose that we are 
engaged in anatomical investigation. With 
the scalpel, microtome, microscope, fixing 


PHYSICAL AND PHYSIOLOGICAL METHODS 5 


and staining reagents and other physical or 
chemical apparatus we separate out or render 
distinguishable the details of structure. But 
these details are only details of form, size, 
colour, physical or chemical characters, and 
spatial relations to other parts. The facts we 
ascertain are physical and chemical facts; 
and the methods we use are physical and 
chemical methods. 

If, on the other hand, we are making a 
physiological investigation, the same is no 
less true. If we are investigating secretion 
we are measuring the mass or volume of the 
substances secreted, or their chemical com- 
position, or perhaps their osmotic pressure, 
or concentrations of ions in them. If we 
are investigating muscular contraction we 
are measuring the rate and extent of the 
contraction, or the accompanying heat pro- 
duction or chemical or electromotive pheno- 
mena. The phenomenon which we observe 
is always some physical or chemical change. 
The methods we use are physical and chemi- 
cal methods, and the resulting facts are 
consequently physical and chemical facts. 

From the very nature of its methods and 

A 


6 THE MECHANISTIC THEORY OF LIFE 


facts, therefore, biology can apparently be 
nothing but applied physics and chemistry. 
When we come to matters of detail it ap- 
pears that biology does nothing, and can do 
nothing, but ask physical and chemical 
questions, and obtain physical and chemical 
answers, in so far as the answers are more 
than partial answers. In tracing, say, the 
development of an organism, or investigating 
the process of secretion, we, of course, obtain, 
in the present state of knowledge, only 
partial answers. We may not be able to 
give a complete statement in physical and 
chemical terms of the processes of develop- 
ment or of secretion; but it remains true, 
nevertheless, that the facts we are ascertain- 
ing are apparently nothing but physical and 
chemical facts, however imperfectly defined. 
Beyond these facts all is more or less empty 
speculation, which scientific men would pro- 
bably do well to avoid. 

For further support the mechanistic theory 
can appeal to the actual history of biology, 
and particularly of physiology. Apart from 
the constant controversies (to which reference 
will be made shortly) between mechanists 


, 


THE HISTORY OF PHYSIOLOGY 4 


and non-mechanists, the history of physiology 
displays uninterrupted progress in the suc- 
cessful application of physical and chemical 
methods to physiological problems. To take 
only a few examples, the principles of 
mechanics were applied by Borelli to eluci- 
date the action of the muscles on the limbs. 
Kepler applied the principles of optics to the 
action of the eye in vision. Harvey estab- 
lished and analysed the facts relating to 
circulation of the blood by the application 
of purely physical observation and reason- 
ing. As a result of the great advance in 
chemistry at the end of the eighteenth 
century the fundamental facts with regard 
to respiration and its relation to nutrition 
and animal heat were discovered; and since 
then the application of chemical methods 
to physiological problems has been continued 
with unbroken success. In more recent 
times the advance of physical chemistry 
has placed new and powerful weapons in the 
hands of physiologists. It is doubtless the 
ease that the application of chemistry to 
physiology has also shown us that the 
chemistry of life is far more complex than 


8 THE MECHANISTIC THEORY OF LIFE 


was formerly suspected. This, however, 
cannot legitimately be used as an argument 
against the mechanistic theory: for the pro- 
gress which has been made by applying 
chemical methods is solid progress, to which 
there has been no set-back, though the goal 
has turned out to be further away than 
appeared to be the case about the middle 
of last century, at the time of the general 
movement among physiologists towards the 
mechanistic theory. It is, perhaps, on the 
chemical side that physiology has made its 
most striking advances in recent times; but 
on the physical side the advance has also 
been continuous. 

We may now turn to some of the argu- 
ments which have been used in favour of a 
non-mechanistic interpretation of biological 
facts. Perhaps the most striking fact with 
regard to physiological phenomena is the 
evidence they present of activity co-ordinated 
in such a manner as to conduce towards the 
survival of either the individual or the species. 
Co-ordination of a similar striking kind is not 
found anywhere outside the organic world; 
and the mere existence of this co-ordination 


A 
o 


CO-ORDINATING MECHANISMS 9 


has been taken as strong evidence for the 
presence in living organisms of some co- 
ordinating influence apart from blind physical 
and chemical forces. 

The reply to this argument is that many 
of the mechanisms by which co-ordination is 
brought about have already been discovered, 
and that every year more is being discovered 
about them. Descartes, in his writings about 
the nervous system, was the first to point the 
way in this line of discovery. He suggested 
nervous mechanisms, by’ means of which 
afferent stimuli and muscular responses are 
co-ordinated; and since his time the theory 
that the nervous system is at bottom nothing 
more than a complex system of reflex mechan- 
isms has been experimentally verified in many 
directions, and has now become a generally 
accepted physiological doctrine. The reflex 
actions associated with consciousness are evi- 
dently so complex that their gradual analysis 
may take generations of research work. We 
have also to bear in mind that many forms of 
nervous activity are excited or influenced by 
chemical stimuli acting, not on peripheral 

afferent nerves, but on the central nervous 


10 THE MECHANISTIC THEORY OF LIFE 


system. Thus the nervous mechanism by 
which the breathing is so regulated as to bring 
to the lungs just the requisite quantity of air, 
in spite of rapid and enormous changes in the 
volume of air required, is actuated by chemical 
stimuli conveyed to the respiratory centre by 
the blood which bathes it. The nervous or | 
other mechanisms by means of which the 
activity of the heart and the distribution of 
blood in different parts of the body are pro- 
perly regulated have also been to a large 
extent elucidated. : 

It is not, however, in connection with 
the nervous system only that co-ordinating 
mechanisms have been discovered. It has 
been known for long that chemical substances 
produced by the activity of one organ are 
conveyed by the blood to other organs, in 
which they excite activity of such a nature as 
to maintain the normal structure, composition 
and functional activity of the body as a whole. 
Thus the secretory action of the kidneys 
varies according to the nature and amount 
of the various substances discharged into the 
blood, or withdrawn from it, by other organs. 
If, for instance, an excess of water is taken up 


CO-ORDINATING MECHANISMS 11 


from the intestines, it is rapidly got rid of 
through increased excretion by the kidneys: 
while diminished excretion balances excessive 
withdrawal of water from the blood, as by 
sweating. The kidneys respond in a similar 
manner to excess of urea, sugar, inorganic 
salts, acids, or alkalies, etc., the result being 
that the normal composition of the blood is 
kept constant within small limits. Another 
similar case is that of the liver, which forms 
or discharges various important substances in 
response to chemical stimuli conveyed through 
the blood. Physiological investigation is con- 
stantly discovering new cases in which the 
activity of one organ is excited by the 
chemical products of activity in other organs. 
In all these cases the response follows the 
stimulus, the cause the effect, with unerring 
accuracy. Apart altogether from the nervous 
system, therefore, the body is full of mech- 
anisms for the co-ordination and control of 
functional activity. The nervous system, 
indeed, has come in recent years to appear 
much less important than was formerly 
supposed in the co-ordination of physiological 
activity ; and it seems to be only in cases 


12 THE MECHANISTIC THEORY OF LIFE 


where very rapid control is required that the 
nervous system plays an important part. 

It is not merely in the case of functional 
activity that chemical stimuli play an im- 
portant part: for evidence is now steadily 
accumulating that the co-ordination of growth 
and maintenance in different parts of the body 
is dependent on the action of chemical sub- 
stances conveyed from part to part by the 
blood and lymph circulation, or by simple 
diffusion from one contiguous part to another. 
Some of the most striking evidence in this 
direction has been afforded by the extraor- 
dinary effect on growth and nutrition which is 
produced by removal or disease of such organs 
as the thyroid gland or the pituitary body. 
Absence of the thyroid completely arrests 
growth, and influences in other ways the 
normal structure of the body; but these effects 
can be annulled by the administration of an 
extract of the thyroid from another animal. 
Hence even such a very small organ as the 
thyroid produces chemical substances which 
excite and control the nutrition of other parts. 
Another well-known case is the influence 
of changes in the generative organs on the 


é 


NATURAL SELECTION 13 


growth and nutrition of distant parts of the 
body. Although the evidence is, owing to the 
great chemical and experimental difficulties, 
accumulating but slowly at present, we cannot 
doubt that the growth and maintenance of 
every part of a living organism is controlled 
by the chemical stimuli derived from other 
parts, or from the environment. 

There thus appears to be no difficulty in 
regarding a living organism as a complex 
system of physico-chemical mechanisms, each 
of which is controlled by the rest in such a 
way that the normal structure and activity of 
the organism is, under ordinary conditions, 
maintained. We can, moreover, verify the 
existence of these mechanisms, one by one, by 
exact experiment; and their actual existence 
has already been verified in a large number of 
instances. Hence the co-ordination of growth 
and activity, as found in living organisms, 
presents, in itself, no real difficulties for the 
mechanistic theory. 

We have still to account for the existence 
of physico-chemical structures possessing the 
marvellous characteristics of living organisms 
—so different from anything found in the 


14 THE MECHANISTIC THEORY OF LIFE 


inorganic world. Here the genius of Charles 
Darwin has provided an explanation in har- 
mony with the mechanistic theory. No type 
of organism can survive in which the physio- 
logical mechanisms are not so constituted and 
so co-ordinated that the organism is capable 
of completing a life-cycle culminating in 
the transmission of a similar structure to its 
descendants. ‘Those organisms and their de- 
scendants which have varied in structure in a 
direction which gives them a smaller proba- 
bility of surviving will become extinct in the 
fierce struggle for existence which prevails 
everywhere among living organisms. On the 
other hand, those which have varied in such 
a direction as to give them a greater proba- 
bility of surviving will increase and multiply, 
displacing the inferior types. Hence by the 
blind operation of natural selection through 
countless ages higher and higher types of 
organism will be produced. 

The wonderful complexity, accuracy, and 
co-ordination of the physiological mechanisms 
found within the bodies of living organisms 
can thus be accounted for on purely mechani- 
eal principles. All that it is necessary to 


a 


MECHANISM OF HEREDITY 15 


assume is that organisms transmit their struc- 
ture to their descendants, but in such a manner 
as to permit of slight variations, on which 
natural selection then acts in such a way that 
the structure is, generation by generation, more 
and more perfected and elaborated. With 
this perfecting of the structure which makes 
for the survival of the species there, of course, 
goes hand in hand the elaboration of the 
mechanism needed for securing the inheritance 
of the more perfect structure. 

On the essential mechanism of hereditary 
transmission, recent investigation, and _par- 
ticularly the work of Weismann, has thrown 
a flood of light. The germ-plasm, from which 
parent and offspring are alike developed, is, 
we have now reason to believe, passed on 
qualitatively unaltered, or almost unaltered, 
from parent to offspring. It is constantly 
inereasing in amount by a simple process of 
growth or quantitative increase; but as regards 
chemical structure and composition it remains 
the same. The offspring resembles the parent 
for the simple reason that both originate from 
material which is qualitatively identical, and 
which is placed originally in qualitatively the 


16 THE MECHANISTIC THEORY OF LIFE 


same physical and chemical environment. 
This being so, the only possible result is that 
the offspring resembles the parent. 

The actual origin of living organisms from 
inorganic matter is still wrapt in mystery. 
We have not yet succeeded in producing in 
the laboratory anything really resembling any 
known living organism. This, however, is 
not to be wondered at, since all the organisms 
which we at present recognise as such are 
now known to be descended through count- 
less generations from their first progenitors. 
Throughout these countless generations 
natural selection has continuously acted, 
gradually evolving a complexity of structure 
which we can never hope to imitate by 
laboratory experiments. 

It is possible, nevertheless, to imagine 
how life may have originated. We can now 
form in the laboratory carbon compounds 
with protein characters which approach in 
some degree in complexity to the natural 
protein compounds found in protoplasm; 
and we may assume that the first step to- 
wards the origin of life was the formation by 
natural means of some variety of protein 


CHEMICAL ORIGIN OF LIFE 17 


material. The complexity of the protein 
molecule is enormous, and its capacity of 
entering into chemical or physical combina- 
tions with other molecules is so great that in 
it we seem to see the possibilities of the evolu- 
tion of something possessing the primitive 
characteristics of life. We can imagine such 
molecules combining by aggregation until the 
aggregate becomes unstable and divides into 
two aggregates, each possessing all the original 
properties of the first, and being capable of 
similarly growing and dividing. If the con- 
ditions are such that this process can go 
on continuously, and that new protein can 
constantly be produced, as is actually the case 
in vegetable tissues, natural selection will soon 
come into play, and the evolution of a less 
imperfect, and more definite and complex, 
form of organism will gradually take place. 

A further part of the case for the mechan- 
istic theory consists in criticisms of alternative 
theories. The traditional opponents of the 
mechanistic theory may be classed as either 
vitalists or animists. The former maintain 
that the behaviour of living organisms is so 
peculiar, and so different from anything met 

B 


18 THE MECHANISTIC THEORY OF LIFE 


with in the inorganic world, that we must 
assume that the processes occurring in living 
organisms are guided and determined by 
some non-physical factor best known as the 
‘vital force’ or ‘vital principle,’ but in 
recent times appearing under various other 
names. This factor is assumed to act blindly 
and unconsciously, and to be in action at all 
parts of the body. The animists also assume 
a non-physical factor; and this they identify 
with the soul, which is supposed, however, 
to act sub-consciously. For the purposes 
of the present argument the animists may, 
perhaps, be classified along with the vitalists, 
as the differences between them are for the 
present purpose very small. 

Although outspoken vitalism has now” 
become somewhat exceptional among biolo- 
gists, or physiologists, and the prevailing 
opinion is in favour of the mechanistic theory, 
yet vitalism in a modified form seems to be 
constantly cropping up in biological litera- 
ture. The reasons for this are, in part at 
least, fairly evident. We have only to look 
back to the writings of some of the leading 
advocates of mechanistic ideas in biology to 


VITALISM 19 


see that in many instances simple mechanical 
theories of various physiological processes 
were put forward without sufficient experi- 
mental evidence of their correctness. Sub- 
sequent investigation has often shown that 
these theories were incorrect, and this result 
has seemed to be a justification for returning 
to the prevalent vitalistic ideas of earlier 
times. 

As an instance of this we may take 
Ludwig’s early theory as to the process by 
which urine is secreted. He supposed that 
urine is separated from the blood in the 
glomeruli of the kidney by a process of 
simple filtration, and that the dilute liquid 
thus formed is concentrated during its 
passage down the tubules by a process of 
osmosis, in which water passes from the 
tubules back into the blood, leaving the fully 
formed urine as a relatively concentrated 
liquid which passes out towards the ureter. 
This theory turned out, when experimentally 
tested, to be far from correct. It is the cells 
lining the tubules of the kidney which are 
the active agents in the secretion of urine; 
and they act against osmotic pressure, picking 


20 THE MECHANISTIC THEORY OF LIFE 


out from the blood, and forcing into the 
ducts of the tubules the various constituents 
of urine. Such a mode of statement seems 
to approximate very closely to vitalism, 
although, as already pointed out, we have 
only to presuppose the existence of suitable 
intra-cellular mechanisms in the cells lining 
the tubules in order to fit the observed facts 
with the mechanistic theory of life. 

As another instance we may take the case 
of oxidation processes occurring in the living 
body. It was formerly believed that physio- 
logical oxidation is a comparatively simple 
process, varying in rate, like ordinary oxi- 
dations occurring outside the body, with the 
supply of oxygen on the one hand, and of 
oxidisable food-material on the other. When, 
however, the matter came to be investigated 
by Pfliger and others, it was found that this 
was not the case: for the supply of oxygen 
and of food-material could be varied within 
wide limits without altering the rate of 
oxidation. Hence it was concluded that the 
living cell regulates its own oxidation pro- 
cesses, and, indeed, all chemical processes 
occurring within it. This appears to be a 


’ 


VITALISM 21 


very vitalistic form of conclusion: for some 
independent factor seems to be postulated 
which regulates the chemical processes 
occurring within cells. From the standpoint 
of the mechanistic theory, however, all that 
need be assumed is that the chemical pro- 
cesses occurring within living cells are far 
more complex than was at one time supposed. 
For one thing, intra-cellular ferments or 
enzymes seem to be largely concerned in 
intra-cellular changes. If, therefore, oxi- 
dations and other intra-cellular chemical 
processes are dependent on the liberation of 
enzymes, we can readily understand why 
these processes do not increase or diminish 
in the same manner as the simpler processes 
commonly met with outside the living body. 
By discovering the nature of the ferments 
concerned, and the conditions determining 
their liberation and mode of action, we may 
hope to be able to give a complete physico- 
chemical explanation of all the phenomena. 
In any case, this seems to be the only line of 
investigation likely to give fruitful results, 
and nothing could be more futile than to 
rest content with the theory that some 
B2 


22 THE MECHANISTIC THEORY OF LIFE 


mysterious agency is at work, the nature 
of which is beyond physical and Kage 
investigation. 

It is only what might be expected on the 
Darwinian theory of natural selection that 
the physico-chemical mechanisms within the 
living body should turn out to be extremely 
complex, since these mechanisms are the 
product of natural selection acting through 
countless generations; and it is folly to go 
back to vitalism for the mere reason that 
living organisms do actually turn out to be 
very complex. 

We must now examine the nature of the 
assumption made by the vitalists, and consider 
to what extent it corresponds with observed 
facts. Vitalism raises no objection to physical 
and chemical explanations applied in what 
is considered their proper place outside the 
intimate vital processes of living organisms. 
It assumes, however, that these intimate pro- 
cesses are guided or controlled by an influence 
which is manifested only in living organisms, 
and which acts in a manner wholly different 
from anything known in the inorganic world. 
The reason for making this assumption is 


o 


VITALISM 23 


that living organisms seem everywhere to 
present evidence of an autonomy of their own. 
They seem to go their own way, and pur- 
sue their own ends, in spite of all kinds of 
disturbing conditions. In a physical and 
chemical environment which is constantly 
changing in one respect or another, they 
develop or maintain certain characteristic 
peculiarities of structure and activity, and 
pursue a characteristic life-history. Mech- 
anisms which would cause them to do this 
under the very varied conditions which they 
experience seem hardly conceivable. Hence 
we must assume in the case of each 
organism the presence of some influence 
which is constantly guiding in the right 
direction the otherwise blind physical and 
chemical processes within the living organism. 
This assumed influence is best known under 
the name of ‘vital force’; but such a name 
is evidently unsuitable, as the word ‘force’ is 
usually employed to designate physical and 
chemical phenomena of a very different 
character. The expressions ‘vital principle,’ 
or ‘entelechy ’ (proposed recently by Driesch) 
are more suitable. 


24 THE MECHANISTIC THEORY OF LIFE 


The manner in which the mechanistic theory 
endeavours to meet the objections of the 
vitalists has already been indicated, but will 
be examined more closely in the second lecture. 
Meanwhile let us see what are the objections 
to vitalism. 

Assuming the vitalistic theory, the simplest 
observations show us that the action of the 
vital principle is dependent on physical and 
chemical conditions of environment, and on 
the physical and chemical structure of the 
organism. If, for instance, the temperature 
is too high or too low, or if the supply of 
oxygen, or even of some inorganic salt, is cut 
off, all characteristic signs of life soon cease. 
The same is the case if the finer structure of 
the living material has been seriously damaged 
by physical or chemical agents. It is thus 
only under certain limiting physical and 
chemical conditions that the vital principle 
can manifest itself. Provided, however, that 
these limiting conditions are present there 
appears, at first sight, to be a wide field for 
the manifestation of the influence of the 
vital principle. If, for instance, a certain ~ 
minimum of oxygen or of food-material is 


DEFECTS OF VITALISM 25 


present, the organism selects just what it 
requires for its growth and maintenance, re- 
jecting or excreting all that is superfluous. 
Let us examine the matter more closely, 
however. The further physiological investi- 
gation is carried, the more clearly does it 
appear that the co-ordinated action by which 
different parts of an organism work together 
for the maintenance of the whole depends on 
chemical substances or physical disturbances 
conveyed from part to part of the living 
substance. The behaviour of each part is 
not merely qualitatively, but also quantita- 
tively dependent on these chemical and 
physical influences. ‘The respiratory centre 
responds to the minutest alterations in the 
partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the 
blood, and the kidney to the smallest varia- 
tions in the concentrations of water or 
sodium chloride or hydrogen ions. Every- 
where in the living body we find, on close 
examination, this close and accurate depend- 
ence of vital activity on the physical and 
chemical conditions in the immediate environ- 
ment. It is, therefore, only from an outside 
and superficial point of view that there 


26 THE MECHANISTIC THEORY OF LIFE 


appears to be something in a living organism 
which acts, within limits, independently of 
the physical and chemical conditions of en- 
vironment. The apparent autonomous selec- 
tive action of the organism turns out to 
be causally dependent in every detail on 
physical and chemical conditions. The vital 
principle, if it exists, is therefore determined 
in its action by those conditions: we can 
never isolate and clearly identify its action. 
As a positive scientific working hypothesis it 
is thus useless; at the best it only serves to 
express our ignorance of the exact means by 
which the parts of a living organism are 
caused to react in a certain manner to a given 
physical or chemical change. This being so, 
the advocates of the mechanistic theory may 
well ask whether vitalism has any real 
justification. 

To illustrate the force of this question it 
is only necessary to refer to the main argu- 
ment for vitalism in the recent writings of 
Driesch. As is well known he discovered 
that in the earliest stages of embryonic 
development the cells of the embryo may be 
separated completely from one another, or 


e 


DEFECTS OF VITALISM or 


their mutual arrangement may be completely 
altered by mechanical means, and yet one of 
the separated cells, or the disarranged collec- 
tion of cells, may develop in a_ perfectly 
normal manner. Here we have presumably 
disarranged the normal mechanism for de- 
velopment, and yet normal development 
occurs. From this Driesch concludes that 
a factor is present which acts independently 
of physical and chemical stimuli, and which 
he calls ‘entelechy,’ and identifies with the 
old ‘ vital force.’ 

Now there is no evidence at all that each 
cell, in growing and dividing in the one 
particular manner which constitutes normal 
development, is not determined by ‘special 
physical and chemical stimuli peculiar to its 
position relatively to the other cells, and to 
the external environment. We do not yet 
know what these stimuli are; but probably 
no physiologist would doubt that they exist, 
and will be discovered when our methods 
are fine enough. Hence Driesch’s argument 
for an independent vital force breaks down 
entirely. 

A further objection to vitalism is that it 


28 THE MECHANISTIC THEORY OF LIFE 


implies a definite breach in the fundamental 
law of conservation of energy. As already 
mentioned, every experimental investigation 
has hitherto resulted in a verification of this 
law in the case of physiological phenomena. 
Any ‘guidance’ of living organisms by the 
vital principle would imply a creation or 
destruction of energy; and this would be 
the case even if the energy created in the 
living substance were again destroyed before 
it could escape to the outside, and so become 
measurable. The reply that this creation or 
destruction of energy may be extremely 
small is not one which can satisfy a scientific 
investigator. A principle which has been 
verified again and again under all sorts of 
conditions cannot be set aside except on 
definite experimental evidence; and this is 
entirely lacking. 

Still another objection to vitalism depends 
upon the fact that in order to ‘guide’ 
effectually the excessively complex physical 
and chemical processes occurring in living 
material, and at many different parts of a 
complex organism the vital principle would 
apparently require to possess a superhuman 


VITALISTIC POSITION’ UNTENABLE 9 


knowledge of these processes. Yet the vital 
principle is assumed to act unconsciously. 
The very nature of the vitalistic assumption 
is thus totally unintelligible. From this 
point of view also the hypothesis is useless: 
for even if we cannot completely understand 
a living organism by the aid of physics and 
chemistry, we do not improve matters by 
postulating an agency which is itself entirely 
unintelligible. 

In one form or another these objections 
to vitalism have been urged repeatedly, and 
there has been no satisfactory reply to them. 
On the other hand, there have been very 
effective retorts from the vitalistic side 
against the mechanistic theory. It is not 
these retorts that concern us at present, how- 
ever, but the inherent untenability of the 
vitalistic position. If the mechanistic theory 
is wrong, this does not prove that the theory 
of the vitalists is right, so that the objections 
to vitalism lose none of their force. 

Let us now try to sum up the position 
reached at the end of this lecture. The 
mechanistic theory of life has been stated in 
outline. It evidently affords to biologists a 


30 THE MECHANISTIC THEORY OF LIFE 


perfectly clear working hypothesis—that the 
peculiar phenomena of life are due to the 
play of the physical and chemical environ- 
ment on intra-protoplasmic mechanisms which 
have been evolved through the influence of 
natural selection acting for ages. If this 
theory is correct, the aim of biology is to 
unravel the mechanism; and biology itself is 
nothing but a branch of physics and chemistry, 
which we may, if we like, distinguish as bio- 
physics and bio-chemistry. The alternative 
hypothesis of the vitalists has been shown to 
be unproved, unintelligible, and practically 
useless as a scientific working hypothesis. 

In the next lecture the mechanistic theory 
itself will be examined, 


LECTURE II 
CRITICISM OF THE MECHANISTIC THEORY 


In the last lecture it was shown that the 
position of the vitalists is wholly unsatisfac- 
tory ; but it does not follow from this that the 
mechanists are right ; and those engaged in the 
observation of living organisms can hardly 
escape feeling an instinctive distrust of the 
mechanistic theory, in spite of the confidence 
with which it has been urged upon the world 
during the last fifty years. Somehow or other 
a living organism never seems to be a mechan- 
ism, however often it may be called one. The 
closer the examination, the more confirmed 
does this impression become, always provided 
that we are studying living organisms them- 
selves, and not merely their dead bodies, or 
material which has been removed from their 
bodies. 


Apart from arguments of a general or philo- 
81 


32 CRITICISM OF MECHANISTIC THEORY 


sophical character, the main strength of the — 
mechanistic theory arises from the fact that all 
physiological activity is apparently dependent 
on physical or chemical ‘causes.’ Whether 
the cause be physical disturbance, heat, light, 
or the presence of one or other of numerous 
chemical substances, it is always something 
definite. The physiologist, however, usually 
calls the cause a ‘stimulus,’ and it must in the 
first place be pointed out that in identifying 
stimulus and response with physical or chemi- 
cal cause and effect the mechanistic theory 
makes a gigantic leap in the dark. 

To make this matter clear, we may take one 
or two examples. A minute and scarcely 
measurable increase in the hydrogen ion con- 
centration of the blood excites the respiratory 
centre of a normal warm-blooded animal to 
intense activity. Similar minute alterations 
in the concentration of water, or sugar, or 
sodium chloride, or hydrogen ions, have a 
corresponding influence on the secretory 
action of the kidney; and cases of a similar 
kind, where both growth and _ physiological 
activity are similarly influenced, may be mul- 
tiplied indefinitely. 


A LEAP IN THE DARK 33 


In all these cases the response depends upon 
the ‘excitability’ of the responding tissue; 
and when we examine the matter further we 
find that the excitability is dependent on a very 
large number of conditions, most of which are 
presumably still unknown. Moreover, the 
excitability varies in response to very minute 
changes in the environment, just as is the case 
with the original response to the stimulus. 
The presence or absence of some _ blood- 
constituent, normally present perhaps in only 
the minutest proportions, may profoundly 
affect the excitability of any tissue: or its 
response may be modified or ‘inhibited’ by 
excitation of other parts. It is true that 
physiologists can obtain a constant response to 
a given stimulus; but this is only the case 
if the conditions are ‘normal.’ In living and 


- intact organisms nature provides us with nor- 


_ malconditions. The more carefully the matter 


is investigated, however, the more clearly does 
it appear that ‘normal conditions’ designate 
something of vast and unknown complexity. 


The fact that such conditions should be realised 


, 
| 


again and again in different individual organ- 


isms, and in the same organism at different 
Cc 


34 CRITICISM OF MECHANISTIC THEORY 


times, is so familiar that its extraordinary 
character, from the physical and chemical 
standpoint, usually escapes attention. 

It may be urged that the immense complex- 
ity and delicacy of the physical and chemical 
conditions on which physiological responses 
depend does not in itself furnish any reasons 
for doubting the mechanistic theory of life. 
This is doubtless true; but the point must be 
emphasised that in the case of stimulus and 
response there is in reality no experimental 
evidence whatsoever that the process can be 
understood as one of physical and chemi- 
cal causation. In the case of physiological 
stimulus and response no real quantitative 
relation can be traced between the supposed 
physical or chemical cause, and its effect. 
When we attempt to trace a connection we 
are lost in an indefinite maze of complex con- 
ditions, out of which the response emerges. It 
is of little use to point out that in many cases 
the determining cause of a physical or chemical 
change may be something very small as com- 
pared with its effect. The turning of a switch, 
or opening of a valve, or application of a tiny 
spark, may, for instance, produce gigantic 


ASSUMED PHYSIOLOGICAL MECHANISMS 35 


effects. In all these cases we can trace the 
chain of cause and effect, whereas in the physio- 
logical case we cannot. Let it be granted 
that hope may be entertained of some day 
tracing the physiological chain. It is never- 
theless clear that the existence of such 
a hope, however confidently expressed, must 
not be confused with evidence.’ In recent 
years it has become the custom to speak 
of the ‘mechanisms’ of physiological activi- 
ties. Until these supposed mechanisms have 
been actually discovered it would be better 
not to use language which implies far 
more than what our present knowledge 
warrants. 
The failure to be able to trace, at present, 
the causal chain between stimulus and 


1 It appears to me that a very striking instance of this con- 
fusion is furnished by the reasoning which runs through Pro- 
fessor Loeb’s recently published essay on Zhe Mechanistic 
Conception of Life (Chicago, and Cambridge University Press, 
1912). Thus after describing the observation that an un- 
fertilised ovum may be excited to development by various 
means, such as placing the ovum for a short time in hypertonic 
sea-water, or simply piercing its outer membrane with a needle, 
Professor Loeb proceeds to draw the extraordinary conclusion 
‘that the process of the activation of the egg by the sperma- 
tozoon, which twelve years ago was shrouded in complete 
darkness, is to-day practically reduced to a physico-chemical 
explanation.’ 


$6 CRITICISM OF MECHANISTIC THEORY 


response implies equal failure in tracing the 
stream of matter or of energy through a living 
organism. We cannot tell what exactly be- 
comes of the atoms and molecules which pass 
into the body—how far, or in what sense, they 
are built up into the living tissue, or in what 
way their potential energy is immediately 
utilised. We must not mistake measurements 
of the balance of matter or energy entering 
and leaving the body, for information as to the 
manner in which this stream passes through 
the living tissues. 

In the previous lecture we saw that in the 
historical development of physiology there 
has been a continuous accumulation of facts, 
obtained by the application of physical and 
chemical methods to physiological phenomena. 
The limits which the vitalists have attempted 
to set to this accumulation of knowledge have 
been broken down again and again, and there 
is no reason to suppose that there are any 
limits. The leaders of the mechanistic phy- 
siology have been completely justified to this 
extent, and we may rest assured that to this 
extent physiology will never go back on the 
step which they took. Our knowledge as to 


TENDENCY OF PHYSIOLOGICAL PROGRESS 37 


physical and chemical conditions which deter- 
mine excitation and excitability, taking these 
words in their widest sense as applying to 
the whole of the elementary phenomena 
with which physiology and morphology deal, 
has grown continuously, and will continue 
to grow. No physiological or morphological 
phenomenon is beyond investigation on similar 
lines; but the results of such investigation 
are by no means identical with the gradual 
establishment of a definite causal connection 
between stimulus and response. There has 
been much unconscious confusion on this 
point. ‘ 
We must now proceed to examine the 
belief, at present very prevalent, that the 
progress of physiology is leading to a gradual 
verification of the mechanistic theory of life. 
It has already been pointed out how depend- 
ent the progress of biology, and particularly 
of physiology, has been on that of physics 
and chemistry. This undoubted fact has 
been taken as evidence that physiology is 
becoming a physical and chemical science, 
and has commonly been coupled with the 
assertion that with the help of these methods 
c2 


88° CRITICISM OF MECHANISTIC THEORY 


great progress has been made in resolving 
physiology into ‘bio-physics’ and ‘bio- 
chemistry.’ 

Now it does not follow at all that because 
physiology makes use of physical and 
chemical knowledge and methods it must be 
nothing more than physics and chemistry. 
All depends upon the nature of the facts 
revealed by the use of these methods. We 
might as well argue that because physicists 
and chemists make use of their sense-organs 
and brains their science must be a branch of 
physiology. The real question concerns the 
nature and general tendency of the con- 
clusions actually attained by physiologists, by 
whatever legitimate means these conclusions 
have been reached. 

In surveying the general trend of physio- 
logical progress it is somewhat difficult to 
know where to begin. From the early modern 
times we find the idea present that the 
activity of some peculiar agency distin- 
guishes living from non-living things. At 
the time of Descartes, for instance, it was 
generally held that apart from the conscious 
animal spirit or soul, a living body is domin- 


DESCARTES AND PHYSIOLOGY 39 


ated by specific agencies known as the vital 
and vegetative ‘spirits.’ 

Descartes was the first to put forward a 
thorough-going mechanistic theory of the 
working and development of the animal 
body. His De Homine and De Forma- 
tione Foetus are works of great biological 
interest, on account of their influence on 
subsequent thought. The body is repre- 
sented, in so far as physiological knowledge 
extended at the time, as nothing but a piece 
of mechanism; and its development is also 
represented as a simple mechanical process. 
The animal spirits are depicted as a subtle 
fluid separated and filtered off into the 
ventricles of the brain by a purely mechanical 
process. The afferent nerves are supposed 
to be fine fibres leading up to the ventricles 
of the brain and connected with valves open- 
ing or closing the upper ends of the efferent 
nerves. These latter are supposed to be 
tubes conveying the animal spirits from the 
ventricles. As a result of any sensory or 
afferent stimulus the threads are pulled, and 
the connected valves consequently opened, 
with the result that the ‘animal spirits’ rush 


40 CRITICISM OF MECHANISTIC THEORY 


down into the muscles supplied by the 
efferent nerves, distending them and thus 
causing them to shorten. According to the 
arrangement of nerve-fibres or tubes, and 
valves, one form of reflex action or another 
follows any given sensory stimulus. The 
chief motive power for the whole of the 
mechanisms by which Descartes suggested 
that the human body is worked and develop- 
ment brought about was furnished by sup- 
posed rhythmical expansions of the blood in 
the heart, owing to chemical explosions. 

The greater part of the physiology of 
Descartes was extremely crude, and lacking 
in experimental foundation. This crudeness 
stands out in strong relief against the far 
sounder, but at the same time far more 
limited, observations and reasoning of Harvey, 
whose writings had greatly influenced Des- 
cartes. Nevertheless the mechanistic ideas 
first put forward in a thoroughly systematic 
form by Descartes have continued to influ- 
ence biology up to the present day. 

If we trace the history of physiology on- 
wards from the time of Descartes we find 
constant conflict between mechanistic and 


JOHANNES MULLER 4] 


non-mechanistic theories, with all sorts of : 
intermediate shades of opinion. The physi- 
cal and chemical mechanisms assumed by 
Descartes and others who succeeded him 
were gradually proved to be non-existent or 
non-effective, and new mechanisms took their 
place. With each new discovery of structure 
or function there came fresh modifications of 
mechanistic theories, and fresh objections to 
them. ‘The discovery of respiratory exchange 
in the latter part of the eighteenth cen- 
tury, the subsequent general application of 
chemistry in physiological investigation, and 
the introduction of the compound microscope 
early last century, were potent factors in this 
development. 

Up till nearly the middle of last century 
the prevailing physiological opinions were on 
the whole more or less vitalistic, and they are 
fairly reflected in Johannes Miiller’s famous 
text-book of physiology. Physical and 
chemical explanations of all processes occur- 
ring outside the actual living substance of the 
body were freely accepted, for instance, for 
all that happens in the liquids enclosed with- 
in the body and for its external mechanism 


42 CRITICISM OF MECHANISTIC THEORY 


generally. The finer regulation of growth, 
nutrition, muscular and nervous functions, 
was believed to be regulated by the ‘vital 
force.’ Miiller had himself taken a prominent 
part in disproving by his microscopical ob- 
servations on glands the mechanistic theories 
previously prevailing with regard to secretion, 
and his numerous observations on growth 
and development had led him in the same 
direction. 

Among the younger physiologists about 
the middle of the century there arose, how- 
ever, a very strong reaction against vitalism 
and in the direction of mechanistic theories. 
Schwann, the discoverer of the fact that the 
bodies of the higher animals are made up of 
cells, believed that he had also discovered 
that cells are deposited from the body liquids 
by a process akin to crystallisation. This 
hypothesis, of course, struck at the very roots 
of vitalism. Within the next few years- 
attack after attack was aimed at all the 
apparent strongholds of vitalism. Du _ Bois 
Reymond published observations pointing to 
an electrical theory of propagation of nerve 
impulses; Ludwig and others devised new 


THE MECHANISTIC MOVEMENT 43 


mechanical theories of secretion and absorp- 
tion; Liebig, though himself a vitalist, put 
forward purely chemical theories of various 
physiological processes; Mayer pointed out 
the source of the energy of animal move- 
ment; and last of all came the publication 
of Darwin’s Origin of Species. 

Vitalism itself was also vigorously and 
directly attacked, and its utter weakness 
pointed out. Perhaps no more clear and 
convincing demonstration of the untenability 
of the vitalistic position has ever been given 
than in du Bois Reymond’s introduction to 
his Untersuchungen iiber thierische Elektricitat 
published in 1848. 

The momentum of the intellectual move- 
ment of that time has lasted to the present 
day, and the influence of this movement has 
spread in ever-widening circles. But we are 
not concerned with this, nor with the fate of 
vitalism, but with the further progress of the 
experimental verification of the mechanistic 
theory. From this standpoint all that can be 
said is that the mechanistic theory has, on the 
whole, fared very badly. Schwann’s simple 
mechanical theory of growth was based on 


44 CRITICISM OF MECHANISTIC THEORY 


imperfect observation, and has long been 
abandoned. We now know that all cells 
are formed by division of pre-existing cells, 
and that the problem of the process of cell- 
growth and cell-nutrition is not one which 
we have at present any prospect of solving 
in a mechanistic direction. Nor is it any 
better with the problems of secretion and 
absorption. Thanks to the work of Ludwig 
himself, of Heidenhain, and a host of other 
investigators, we now know far more than 
was known at the middle of last century 
about secretion and absorption; but their 
‘mechanism’ is further away than ever. 
When Johannes Miiller suggested that the 
processes of secretion and absorption are 
akin to the processes of growth he was 
doubtless far nearer the truth than his 
immediate successors: for secretion and 
absorption are evidently only phases of the 
many-sided metabolic activity which we 
designate by the name of cell-life. We have 
made great progress in learning how many- 
sided, and how orderly, this cell-life is, but 
none at all in explaining how this life is 
ordered and maintained. 


RECENT PHYSIOLOGICAL PROGRESS 45 


The simple chemical theories of the re- 
spiratory and other metabolic processes 
occurring in the body have likewise dis- 
appeared. The work of Pfliiger, Rubner, and 
others has proved that in the living body 
all these processes are regulated with the 
utmost nicety, and that the seat of the 
regulation lies within the living cells of 
the body. By what physical or chemical 
process regulation is brought about we do 
not know. We have not even discovered 
the agents employed in the process, although, 
as already pointed out, there is reason to 
believe that, in many instances at least, these 
agents are intra-cellular enzymes. : 

It has become evident also, that no simple 
physico-chemical theory of muscular or other 
physiological movements will suffice. The 
processes which determine visible movement, 
or transmission of excitation in living cells, 
are an integral part of the many- sided 
activity of the living cell, so that the 
elementary problems of physiology cannot 
be solved piecemeal. A _ physico-chemical 
explanation of muscular movement, or of 
secretion, or cell-nutrition, or nervous excita- 


46 CRITICISM OF MECHANISTIC THEORY 


bility, would thus be a solution of the whole 
problem of life. With every year of physio- 
logical advance, however, we seem to get 
further and further away from any prospect 
of such a solution. It was only through the 
prevailing ignorance of physiological facts 
that the physiologists of the middle of last 
century imagined that they were approaching 
a physico-chemical solution of elementary 
physiological problems. To us Schwann’s 
theory of cell-growth seems almost as crude 
as Descartes’ extraordinary theory of the 
mechanism of growth and development. 

In the physiology of the central nervous 
system the main progress during the last half- 
century has been in connection with the 
localisation of function and tracing of paths 
of physiological connection. Until recently, 
at least, but little has been done in the 
direction of a thorough examination of the 
elementary problems presented by the 
simplest cases of ‘reflex’ action. The work 
of Sherrington and others is now, however, 
throwing new light on these problems, and 
it seems quite clear that the old idea of simple 
and definite ‘reflex mechanisms’ in the 


= RECENT PHYSIOLOGICAL PROGRESS 47 


central nervous system must be abandoned. 
In the nervous system physiologists are also 
faced with the problem presented by the re- 
coveries of functional activity after destruc- 
tion of centres or nerve paths on which this 
activity normally depends. In the case of 
other parts of the body this recovery of 
function is also evident enough; but in the 
central nervous system differentiation of 
function is so complex and definite that 
recovery of functions stands out as a fact 
of extraordinary interest and_ significance. 
For this phenomenon it is difficult to imagine 
any physico-chemical explanation. 

To sum up, the application to physiology 
of new physical and chemical methods and 
discoveries, and the work of generations of 
highly-trained investigators, have resulted in 
a vast increase of physiological knowledge, 
but have also shown with ever-increasing 
clearness that physico-chemical explanations 
of elementary physiological processes are as 
remote as at any time in the past, and that 
they seem to physiologists of the present time 
far more remote than they appeared at the 
middle of last century. 


48 CRITICISM OF MECHANISTIC THEORY 


Probably no competent physiologist will 
deny this. But, it will be urged, it is only what 
might be expected that vital mechanism, the 
product of untold millions of years of natural 
selection, should be extremely complex ; and 
the fact that it is so affords no real ground for 
doubting the mechanistic hypothesis. There 
are many phenomena in inorganic nature which 
we do not yet understand, but we do not for 
that reason regard them as having other than 
physical and chemical causes. 

We must now push our examination a 
stage further. Let us assume that all the 
delicate and persistent reactions met with 
in the living body are due to_ intra- 
cellular mechanism produced by natural 
selection or in any other way, and see 
whether this assumption will help us to 
understand the facts. First of all, let us be 
clear about what such an assumption implies, 
Those who have not studied the physiology 
of the higher and better-known organisms, 
such as man or some mammal, have often 
very little conception of the exquisite delicacy 
of physiological reactions. This delicacy 
was hardly even suspected in former times. 


DELICACY OF ORGANIC REGULATION 49 


Kustachius, who was probably the first to 
make experiments on secretion by the 
kidneys, contented himself with taking a 
dead, and probably decomposing, kidney, 
and passing through its blood-vessels such 
liquids as spirits of wine or water, and 
observing how much of these liquids issued 
into the ureter! It is only quite recently 
that we have come to realise the astounding 
fineness with which the kidneys, respiratory 
centre, and other parts regulate the composi- 
tion of the blood. 

To illustrate this point I may perhaps refer 
to a subject which we have recently been 
investigating at Oxford. We have found 
that the respiratory centre is so extremely 
sensitive to any increase or diminution of the 
partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the blood 
that a diminution 0°2 per cent. of an atmo- 
sphere, or 1°5 mm. of mercury will cause 
apnoea, while a corresponding increase will 
double the breathing.. The recent researches 
of Hasselbalch have afforded experimental 
evidence of what had already seemed very 
probable—that the stimulus to which the 
centre responds is the difference in hydrogen 

D 


50 CRITICISM OF MECHANISTIC THEORY 


ion concentration, or acidity, brought about 
by the very slight deficiency or excess of 
carbon dioxide. He has also investigated 
quantitatively the effects on the hydrogen 
ion concentration of the blood of varying the 
partial pressure of carbon dioxide. From his 
results and ours it follows that the hydrogen 
ion concentration of the blood during rest 
is extraordinarily constant, and remains so 
day by day and year by year. As the amount 
of acid and alkali passing into the blood from 
the food and other sources is constantly 
varying, it follows that the regulation of 
hydrogen ion concentration is mainly brought 
about by the kidneys. It has been known 
for long that the urine varies in acidity or 
alkalinity according to the diet ; but Hassel- 
balch has measured the actual variations in 
hydrogen ion concentration. Putting to- 
gether his conclusions and ours, it appears 
that during ordinary resting conditions the 
variations in hydrogen ion concentration of 
the urine are about a hundred thousand times 
as great as those of the arterial blood. 

Thus the kidney epithelial cells react so 
delicately to variations in hydrogen ion con- 


DELICACY OF ORGANIC REGULATION 51 


centration of the blood, that the very smallest 
variation in the direction of acidity or alka- 
linity excites them to excrete a liquid which 
is, relatively speaking, intensely acid or alka- 
line, the net result being that the normal 
hydrogen ion concentration of the blood 
remains practically constant. 

When we have such figures before us 
we realise the marvellous fineness of the 
regulation by the kidneys and respiratory 
centre. Physiologists are still so much under 
the influence of the old gross mechanical 
theories of secretion that attempts at exact 
measurements of the delicacy of regulation 
by the kidneys have hitherto scarcely been 
made in the case of regulation in other 
directions, though we have every reason to 
believe that similar delicacy exists as regards 
the regulation of the water, salts, and other 
blood constituents. It is hard to realise that 
something which looks under the microscope 
like nothing more than a somewhat indefinite 
collection of gelatinous material can react, and 
continue throughout life to react, true as the 
finest mechanism of highly tempered steel, 
to the minutest change in its environment, 


52 CRITICISM OF MECHANISTIC THEORY 


We meet with the same delicacy of adjust- 
ment in the regulation of such things as body- 
temperature, blood-volume, or heat-production. 
So accurately does the body adjust its con- 
sumption of oxygen and of food-material to 
its energy requirements that it can actually 
be used, as Rubner found, as a calorimeter; 
for it substitutes consumption of proteins, 
carbohydrates, and fats for one another in 
exact proportion to their energy values as 
determined with a calorimeter. In Liebig’s 
time this delicate regulation was altogether 
unknown. It was supposed that any excess 
of protein simply ‘fell a prey’ to oxygen, and 
that if the oxygen percentage of the air 
was increased, or even if the amount of air 
breathed was increased, or the barometric 
pressure was raised, oxidation in the living 
body would increase, just as in the oxidation 
of substances outside the body. By accurate 
measurements of the intake and output. of 
material and energy the true facts as to the 
rigid accuracy with which metabolism is regu- 
lated have gradually been established during 
the last fifty years. 

We must, therefore, in considering the 


‘SIMPLE PROTOPLASM’ 53 


mechanistic theory, put aside from our minds 
all the hazy ideas of former generations as to 
the structure of living cells being nothing but 
that of an indefinite ‘plasma.’ Such ideas 
belong to the early childhood of physiology. 
We now know that ‘simple protoplasm’ 
exists nowhere, not even among the most 
primitive protozoa or bacteria. Modern in- 
vestigation of the complex and _ intensely 
specific functional activities of every variety 
of living organism or cell has relegated the 
old ideas, derived from mere microscopic 
examination, to oblivion. What the mech- 
anistic theory must assume in the case of an 
organism such as man is a vast assemblage 
of the most intricate and delicately adjusted 
cell-mechanisms, each mechanism being so 
constituted as to keep itself in working order 
year after year, and in exact co-ordination 
with the working of the millions of other 
cell-mechanisms which make up the whole 
organism. 

This assumption is surely one which taxes 
scientific imagination to the utmost, but let 
us make it and continue the argument. We 
have now to imagine the mechanism of repro- 

D2 


54 CRITICISM OF MECHANISTIC THEORY 


duction and heredity. This vast organisation 
of cell-mechanisms has all been developed 
from a single cell, itself the product of the 
union of two cells—an ovum and a sperma- 
tozoon; and we have every reason to believe 
that the hereditary characters, which are 
derived through both cells, are carried in the 
two nuclei which unite to form the nucleus 
of the fertilised germ-cell. On the mechan- 
istic theory this nucleus must carry within 
its substance a mechanism which by reaction 
with the environment not only produces the 
millions of complex and delicately balanced 
mechanisms which constitute the adult organ- 
ism, but provides for their orderly arrange- 
ment into tissues and organs, and for their 
orderly development in a certain perfectly 
specific manner. 

The mind recoils from such a stupendous 
conception ; but let us follow the argument 
further. In the previous lecture I gave such 
an account of heredity as is usually given 
from the mechanistic standpoint. It needs 
very little consideration to see that this 
account consisted of little more than empty 
words. ‘The germ-plasm was supposed to be 


MECHANISM AND HEREDITY 5B 


nothing more than a collection of material of a 
certain composition, and capable, in a suitable 
environment, of indefinite quantitative in- 
crease or growth. Parent and offspring were 
supposed to be similar because they had both 
sprung from germ-plasm of the same com- 
position. This germ-plasm could be added 
to, divided, or mixed with other germ-plasm 
in sexual reproduction, just as if it were so 
much treacle. 

It seems perfectly clear that germ-plasm of 
so simple a character as this could by itself 
furnish no explanation whatever of the de- 
velopment from it of the adult organism with 
all its enormous complication and absolute 
definiteness of structure. If the germ-plasm 
were so simple, the complication and definite- 
ness would have to be attributed to its 
environment :. whereas all the evidence points 
to the nuclear germ-plasm as the essential 
carrier of hereditary characters. We are thus 
compelled, on the mechanistic hypothesis, to 
attribute to the germ-plasm, or germinal 
nuclear substance, a structure so arranged 
that in presence of suitable pabulum and — 
stimuli it produces the whole of the vast and 


56 CRITICISM OF MECHANISTIC THEORY 


definitely ordered assemblage of mechanisms 
existing in the adult organism. Such a 
structure must be absolutely definite and 
inconceivably complex. There is no escape 
from this assumption; and to speak of 
‘plasma’ when we mean such a structure is 
clearly absurd. 

This nuclear structure or mechanism must, 
according to the mechanistic theory, have 
been formed within a very short period by 
the union of two others—a male and a female 
one. How two such mechanisms could com- 
bine to form one is entirely unintelligible, 
and the observed details of the process 
tend only to make it, if possible, more un- 
intelligible. When we trace each nuclear 
mechanism backwards we find ourselves 
obliged to admit that it has been formed 
by division from a pre-existing nuclear 
mechanism, and this from_ pre - existing 
nuclear mechanisms through millions of cell- 
generations. We are thus forced to the 
admission that the germ-plasm is not only 
a structure or mechanism of inconceivable 
complexity, but that this structure is cap- 
able of dividing itself to an absolutely 


a 


MECHANISM AND HEREDITY 57 


indefinite extent and yet retaining its original 
structure. 

We might, perhaps, get over the difficulty 
for a generation or two of cells, by assuming 
that the germ-plasm contains, not one, but 
several nuclear mechanisms, and that only 
one of these mechanisms comes into play at 
each reproduction, others being left to form 
the germ-plasm of the next generation, or 
otherwise to provide for emergencies. As a 
matter of fact, a theory of this kind has been 
put forward in order to account for the fact 
that, as has been shown so clearly by Driesch 
and others, not only the germ-cells, but also 
other cells in the developing embryo, or even 
in the adult organism, may, on occasion, give 
rise to the reproduction of a whole organism. 
It has been supposed that parts of the original 
germ-plasm, or, in plain English, nuclear 
mechanisms capable of giving rise to the re- 
production of a whole organism, may and do 
pass into ordinary somatic cells, as well as into 
the direct line of future sexual reproductive 
cells. 

This far-fetched hypothesis only makes 
matters worse for the mechanistic theory of 


58 CRITICISM OF MECHANISTIC THEORY 


heredity ; for we have to account, not for only 
one, but for a large number of stupendously 
complex reproductive mechanisms within the 
original germ-plasm, and for their endless 
division and multiplication. The real difficulty 
for the mechanistic theory is that we are 
forced, on the one hand, to postulate that the 
germ-plasm is a mechanism of enormous 
complexity and definiteness, and, on the other, 
that this mechanism, in spite of its abso- 
lute definiteness and complexity, can divide 
and combine with other similar mechanisms, 
and can do so to an absolutely indefinite 
extent without alteration of its structure. 
On the one hand we have to postulate 
absolute definiteness of structure, and on 
the other absolute indefiniteness. 

There is no need to push the analysis 
further. ‘The mechanistic theory of heredity 
is not merely unproven, it is impossible. It 
involves such absurdities that no intelligent 
person who has thoroughly realised its 
meaning and implications can continue to 
hold it. 

It may, perhaps, be argued that although 
a mechanistic theory of reproduction appears 


é 


FAILURE OF MECHANISTIC THEORY 59 


to be impossible, this need not. affect the 
practical value of the mechanistic theory in 
biology. In ultimate analysis the ordinary 
working conceptions of physics and chemistry 
present great difficulties ; but no one doubts, 
for example, the practical value of the 
hypotheses of mass, energy, atoms, and 
molecules. Similarly, there may be ultimate 
difficulties about a mechanistic theory of life, 
and yet the practical value of this theory 
may remain. 

There is certainly some truth in this 
argument. We often treat a living organism, 
or some portion of it, as if it were nothing but 
a collection of ordinary matter, or a machine 
actuated by the ordinary forces ot nature. As 
will be pointed out more fully below, this 
mode of treatment is sometimes the best 
that is practicable, and its value cannot be 
doubted. In so treating the facts we are, 
however, leaving out of account almost all 
those phenomena which are apparently specific 
to living organisms, and with which biology 
mainly deals. In actual fact the failure of 
the mechanistic theory of reproduction cuts 
deep into our conceptions of almost every 


60 CRITICISM OF MECHANISTIC THEORY 


detail of biological fact and investigation. 
Biology deals at every point with phenomena 
which, when we examine them, can be re- 
solved into metabolic phenomena—exchange 
of material and energy, as exemplified in 
growth, development, maintenance, secretion 
and absorption, respiration, gross movements 
in response to stimuli, and other excitatory 
processes. Now metabolism is itself a con- 
stant process of breaking down and reproduc- 
tion of what is living. There is no reason 
for separating the reproduction of a whole 
organism from the constant reproduction of 
parts of it in ordinary metabolic process. 
Hence our conception of heredity involves 
every part of biology; and if we cannot frame 
a mechanistic theory of heredity we are 
equally at a loss in connection with the 
ordinary phenomena of metabolism, and we 
have no right to use mechanistic hypotheses 
in connection with these phenomena. We 
have also seen already that the ascertained 
facts do not in any case point to mechanistic 
theories of the ordinary activities with which 
biology deals. 

As a physiologist I can see no use for 


MECHANISTS AND VITALISTS 61 


the hypothesis that life, as a whole, is a 
mechanical process. This theory does not 
help me in my work ; and indeed I think it 
now hinders very seriously the progress of 
physiology. I should as soon go back to 
the mythology of our Saxon forefathers as 
to the mechanistic physiology. 

Although the mechanistic theory of life 
will soon become a matter of past history, 
there can be no doubt that it has filled an 
extremely valuable part in the development 
of physiology. Again and again mechanical 
theories of one sort or another have served 
as temporary working hypotheses round 
which experimental investigation has centred 
in physiology. This has been as true of 
the grosser mechanical hypotheses of the 
seventeenth century as of the more refined 
physical and chemical hypotheses of later 
times. The merit of these hypotheses has been 
that they were capable of either verification or 
disproof, whereas the vitalistic theories have 
been incapable of being experimentally tested. 

Let us try to see why the latter has been the 
case. The vital force was conceived as some- 
thing acting ‘from the blue’ on ordinary 


62 CRITICISM OF MECHANISTIC THEORY 


matter, and yet as not acted on itself. Its 
presence could only be verified through the 
failure of physical and chemical explanation 
of certain very striking phenomena, namely 
the development and maintenance of a certain 
specific structure and certain specific activities. 
In so far as any fact connected with life could 
be explained on physical and chemical grounds 
the vitalists were at one with the mechanists. 
In so far as physico-chemical explanation 
failed they attributed the phenomena to the 
intervention of the ‘vital force.’ Thus their 
dualistic working hypothesis fitted the facts 
in whatever way they turned out, so that the 
stimulus afforded by one definite hypothesis, 
which could be either verified or disproved, 
was absent. But as they admitted the 
hypotheses of physics and chemistry with 
regard to the material and atomic constitu- 
tion of the universe, and based all their 
observations and methods on these assump- 
tions, the natural consequence was that in 
matters of experimental detail they always 
found themselves dealing either with what 
appeared to be physical and chemical 
phenomena or with something unintelligible, 


MECHANISTS AND VITALISTS 63 


In detail, therefore, the sphere of action of 
the ‘vital force’ was a dim and misty sphere 
of unintelligibility—a purely negative sphere. 
So far as anything definite could be traced 
on the confines of this sphere it was some- 
thing physical or chemical, and beyond this 
was indefinite mist. Where and how the 
‘ vital force ’ acted on the atoms or molecules, 
or what exactly became of them, no one could 
say; but out of the mist they seemed to 
appear again, once more in the form of atoms 
and molecules obeying physical and chemical 
laws, but ordered in such a specific and 
unmistakable manner as to indicate that 
within the sphere of indefinite mist some 
mysterious factor was at work. As, however, 
the only definite detail was physical and 
chemical detail, the mechanists were left in 
possession of all that could be positively 
investigated in detail. 

The mechanists have contended that the 
misty sphere is only the mist of our ignorance 
of the physical and chemical conditions, and 
that year by year this mist is being gradually 
dispelled by the advance of physiological 
investigation. We have seen already that 


64 CRITICISM OF MECHANISTIC THEORY 


this is a complete illusion. The advance of 
investigation has only served to make the 
misty sphere more evident; and not only does 
it exist, but there is not the remotest chance, 
as we have just seen, that physical or chemical 
investigation will ever dispel the mist. The 
phenomena of life are of such a nature that 
no physical or chemical explanation of them 
is remotely conceivable. 

Let us try to get to grips with this matter. 
W hat is the real cause of the helpless position 
in which biology finds herself? ‘The mechan- 
istic hypothesis has been the only one of the 
two which seemed inherently capable of 
helping us positively in the details of biologi- 
cal investigation; and yet this hypothesis is 
unmistakably a failure in relation to biologi- 
cal investigation as a whole; and the vitalistic 
theory, if one can call it a theory, is only a 
way of registering this failure, and does not 
help us to a real understanding. 

The main outstanding fact is that the 
mechanistic account of the universe breaks 
down completely in connection with the 
phenomena of life. Whether it is not also 
insufficient in connection with phenomena 


CAUSE OF MECHANISTIC FAILURE 65 


outside what we at present regard as life is 
a further question which need not be discussed. 
at present. When any hypothesis fails to 
correspond with facts it is the hypothesis 
which needs reconsideration. In the next 
lecture the physico-chemical hypothesis with 
regard to our experience generally must first 
be examined, after which we must consider 
whether no other hypothesis will fit the 
facts. It may be that the practical failure of 
vitalism has depended on the fact that the 
vitalists have accepted without criticism the 
physico-chemical account of our experience, 
and have thus placed themselves in a position 
in which they are powerless to help biological 
investigation. 


LECTURE III 
BIOLOGY AND THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES 


At the end of the last lecture we were led up 
to the question as to how far the interpreta- 
tion assumed by the physical sciences in their 
account of the visible and sensible universe is 
valid. This is evidently a very wide question, 
involving far-reaching philosophical discus- 
sion. Yet the reason why such a discus- 
sion cannot be shirked is evident. We found 
that in the case of life the facts are incon- 
sistent with the physical and chemical account 
of phenomena. We, therefore, cannot adopt 
the attitude that whatever may be the ulti- 
mate truth about the universe the ordinary 
working hypotheses of physics and chemistry 
are sufficient for the immediate purposes of 
our work as physiologists. We must probe 
more deeply. 


At the present time there is a widespread 
86 


PHILOSOPHY AND PHYSICAL REALITY 67 


prejudice against philosophical or ‘ metaphysi- 
cal’ discussions. It is asserted, for instance, 


that system replaces system in the history of 


philosophy, and no abiding truth is arrived at. 
The efforts of philosophers are thus vain, and 
practical men would do well to disregard 
completely all metaphysical speculation. 

Such teaching is unworthy of every tradi- 
tion which has helped to raise us from the 
level of primitive savages. Even if it were 
true that philosophical speculation has hitherto 
led to no definite result, we should not be men 
if we gave up the quest after truth. It is 
only, however, a shallow and ignorant mind 
that sees in the history of philosophy nothing 
but a series of systems, each as bad or as good 
as the other, and succeeding one another like 
the ‘turns’ in a music-hall entertainment. 
The progress of philosophy has been just as 
continuous as the progress of science, and the 
history of philosophy appears to be a meaning- 
less succession of systems to those only who 
have never taken the trouble to understand 
them. 

To philosophers the meaning of that 
appearance of physical reality with which we 


68 BIOLOGY AND PHYSICAL SCIENCES 


are so familiar has been a constant subject 
of investigation, and we must consider as well 
as we can what light they have thrown on 
the particular problem before us. We must, 
therefore, try to trace the reasoning which, in 
its successive developments, has guided them. 

When we regard the conception of the 
visible and tangible universe as it is presented 
to us by the physical sciences we find that it 
not only stands the most searching laboratory 
tests, but that it also stands the tests of 
practical experience of a very wide kind. The 
engineer, the manufacturer, the navigator, the 
soldier, the lawyer, can apparently rely upon 
it absolutely. But philosophy points out that 
if it corresponds to absolute reality it must be 
consistent with the whole of our experience; 
and first and foremost it must be consistent 
with our own conscious relations to it, which 
have, after all, been entirely left out in the 
laboratory and other tests. 

At first it may seem simple enough to say 
that we are conscious of the physical world. 
It is there, plainly before us. But then comes 
the reflection that the appearance can only be 
transmitted to us through our sense organs 


4 


DAVID HUME 69 


and sensory nerves. All that we immediately 
perceive can only be sensory disturbances 
of some kind, from which we infer the exist- 
ence of the physical reality outside. This is a 
necessary, but also a fatal admission: for what 
right have we to draw such an inference? 
Absolutely none, as Bishop Berkeley first 
pointed out. We have no right even to call 
‘our sensations impressions, or to regard 
ourselves as anything more than a stream of 
sensations. The appearance of a sensible 
world, with our bodies present in it, can be 
nothing but an appearance due to the manner 
in which the sensations group themselves. 
The appearance of substantiality or of cause 
and effect can be due to nothing else but the 
mysterious fact that certain sensations are 
associated together or follow one another in 
a certain order. Such was the reasoning of 
David Hume; and his inferences follow 
inevitably if we start with the provisional 
assumption that the physical world as science 
represents it to us has absolute reality. If it 
has, then we cannot possibly know it; and all 
our supposed knowledge is nothing but the 
illusion which Hume described. 
E2 


70 BIOLOGY AND PHYSICAL SCIENCES 


There is no flaw in the reasoning of 
Berkeley and Hume, absurd as may seem 
the conclusions which they reached. ‘The 
flaw is in the premises, and particularly in 
the assumption from which the reasoning 
originally started, that the world is some- 
thing self-existent and outside us, as physical 
science appears to teach. This assumption 
simply destroys itself, leaving nothing but the 
sceptical conclusions of Hume. 

How long will it be till the world, and 
particularly the scientific world, begins to 
take in the significance of David Hume’s 
reasoning? His body has lain quiet at the 
foot of the Calton Hill in Edinburgh for 
nearly a hundred and forty years; but the 
old ideas which he finally showed to be un- 
tenable are still popularly accepted, just as if 
he had never lived. To those who imagine 
that the secrets of our existence are likely 
to be revealed in, say, the latest discoveries 
in colloid chemistry, I would commend a 
careful perusal of Hume’s Treatise of Human 
Nature. 

Whether we take the ordinary popular 
view, as taught by the theologians, that the 


IMMANUEL KANT 71 


soul is a non-material entity situated during 
life within a material body in a material 
world, or else adopt the mechanistic theory 
that there is no soul, but only a series of 
‘states of consciousness’ lighted up some- 
how or other within a material brain, we 
cannot escape Hume’s destructive criticism. 
This criticism destroys utterly the assumption 
of a universe of self-existent things. 

But the appearance of knowledge of our 
universe and all that it contains does certainly 
exist and must be accounted for. The task of 
accounting for it was taken up by Immanuel 
Kant, who carried us far beyond Hume. 

Kant did not satisfy himself with Hume's 
account of the data of consciousness as a 
stream of isolated impressions or sensations, 
cohering or associating themselves with one 
another in a manner of which we can give 
no ultimate account. He proceeded to ex- 
amine carefully the nature of sensation or 
perception. One thing which he found was 
that sensations never do exist in isolation from 
one another, but that each carries with it a 
reference to other sensations. A sensation, 
if it is distinguishable at all, is here and now. 


72 BIOLOGY AND PHYSICAL SCIENCES 


This means that it is given in relation to past, — 
future, and co-existent states of consciousness 
which are indissolubly united with one another. 
Moreover, each distinguishable element in 
experience bears with it its relation to the 
others in a certain order. Were there no such 
definite relations of sequence and spatial in- 
terconnection there could be no perception 
or experience at all: the ‘hereness’ and 
‘nowness’ of each element in experience 
would be impossible. Hence spatial and 
temporal relations, causal sequence, substan- 
tiality, and the other general ideas by the 
existence of which our experience is ordered, 
are all given to us in the simplest elements 
of experience. The supposed possibility of 
analysing our perceptions into elements con- 
sisting of ‘simple’ unrelated sensations or 
‘ states of consciousness,’ is an illusion. There 
are no such things as unrelated sensations. 
Now this, of course, does not imply that 
the whole visible universe is given to us as 
an intelligibly connected system as soon as we 
open our eyes. It does mean, however, that 
from the beginning the outlines of such a 
system are present, however dim and indefinite 


a 


IMMANUEL KANT 73 


the details may be. It means also that be- 
tween ourselves and the world round us, and 
between the various things which we find in 
the world, there is no ultimate separateness 
of existence such as seems to be assumed in 
the ordinary physical conception of the world. 
All are parts of one inseparable whole. 

This is a conclusion of such stupendous and 
far-reaching import that it may need centuries 
for the world to take it in and even dimly 
realise its implications, and where it leads 
us to. Sooner or later, however, it will be 
realised that the materialism of the nineteenth 
century has been nothing but an insignificant 
eddy in the stream of human progress. In 
Kant’s writings his thought was evidently 
trammelled by the difficulty of realising how 
great a leap forward he was making. Hume’s 
scepticism had not completely done its work 
in his mind, for he still postulates the existence 
of a so-called noumenal world of things-in- 
themselves which are the unknowable cause 
of the constant newness and variety in our 
experience. He also retains the idea of finite 
individual minds, each armed, as it were, with 
general ideas or ‘categories’ which convert 


74 BIOLOGY AND PHYSICAL SCIENCES 


into the orderly system of our experience the 
impressions caused by the noumenal reality. 
His immediate successors pointed out that 
there was no reason left for assuming the 
existence of things-in-themselves outside of 
us. ‘Ihese supposed existences are nothing 
but the ghosts of the world of independently 
existing matter which Hume had shown to 
be non-existent. The supposed separately 
existing finite minds are also not proof against 
Hume’s criticism. We must account other- 
wise for all the variety and ‘contingency’ 
of our universe. Both the external world of 
things and the spiritual world of persons have 
their existence, somehow or other, in only one 
Supreme Existence. In the efforts to show 
in detail how this is so the philosophical 
movement initiated by Kant exhausted itself 
for the time; but we shall have occasion to 
return later to these efforts. 

We must now look somewhat more closely 
at Kant’s account of how the sensible world 
comes to appear to us as it does, and what 
bearing his conclusions, and those of his suc- 
cessors, have on the great biological problem 
which is the main subject of these lectures. 


KANT AND BIOLOGY "5 


Kant enumerated definitely the ‘ categories’ 
or general ideas under which he believed that 
our perceptions are ordered. This list seems 
very artificial, and is based on the old formal 
logic, but it includes the ideas of substance, 
cause and effect, and reciprocal action—the 
ideas of the physics of Kant’s time. He him- 
self, it may be remarked, was a physicist and 
mathematician of no mean repute. The list 
limits perception to the perception of a purely 
physical world, such as the physical sciences 
described, and he had no special category 
for living organisms. On Kantian principles, 
therefore, a living organism can only be per- 
ceived as a material structure or mechanism. 
In this respect, Kant was at one with the 
mechanistic school of biologists. For him, 
however, the reason why we must perceive 
organisms as mechanisms is not because they, 
in themselves, are mechanisms, but because 
the mind is so constituted that it can only 
perceive them as mechanisms. 

Kant’s successor, Hegel, pointed out that 
his list of categories was incomplete in 
various directions: also that a special cate- 
gory or categories ought to be added 


46 BIOLOGY AND PHYSICAL SCIENCES 


for organic life, as the idea of life is 
one of the fundamental ideas. There is 
no reason why a category or general 
conception of life should not be just 
as much constitutive of our experience as 
the category of substance. Here, there- 
fore, we have a possible way out of our 
difficulties with the mechanistic theory of 
life. In trying to reduce life to physical 
and chemical mechanism we are _ perhaps 
in some way confusing two different cate- 
gories. Kant’s general philosophical con- 
clusions have in any case thrown a quite 
new light on our conceptions of the physical 
world, and have taught us that the validity of 
these conceptions is of a very different nature 
from what was previously believed. It may 
be that just as we cannot base physics on the 
purely mathematical conceptions of exten- 
sion, so we cannot base biology on the 
purely physical conceptions of matter and 
energy. With these possibilities in mind let 
us return to a discussion of the facts which 
biological investigation discloses. 

What we have first to ask is whether, as a 
matter of fact, we habitually use, in dealing 


e 


THE CONCEPTION OF ORGANISM 77 


with the phenomena of life, a fundamental 
conception or working hypothesis which is 
different from the fundamental conceptions 
of the physical sciences, and cannot be 
reduced to them. The question, for the 
moment, is not whether we are justified in 
using such a conception, but whether we 
actually do use it. When this question is 
clearly realised there is, it seems to me, but 
one answer to it, and that in the affirmative. 
In dealing with life we not only use a whole 
series of special terms, but these terms appear 
to belong to a specific general conception 
which is never made use of in the physical 
sciences. 

Life manifests itself in two ways—as struc- 
ture and as activity. But we also recognise— 
a biologist feels it in his very bones—that this 
is huing structure and living activity. Each 
part of the structure not only bears a more or 
less definite spatial relation to the other parts, 
but it is actively maintained in that relation. 
The structure is thus in itself the expression 
of the activity, and the ceaseless metabolic 
activity of which visible structure is the 
sensuous expression forms one department of 


78 BIOLOGY AND PHYSICAL SCIENCES 


physiological study—that of nutrition. But 
the more closely living activity in general is 
examined, the more clear does it become that 
all living activity is structural or metabolic 
activity, either directly or indirectly. The 
changes in the retina when light falls upon it 
are metabolic or structural activities. The 
same is true of the activities of nerve cells, 
muscle cells, gland cells, or any other living 
cells; and the gross visible movements of 
the body, no less than its gross visible struc- 
ture, are but the outer sign of metabolic 
activity. 

The body can also be affected mechanically 
or chemically by influences from without ; 
but effects so produced are of not the 
slightest interest to a biologist, except in so 
far as they may be connected with living 
activity. 

The living structure is evidently organised : 
that is to say every part of it bears a definite. 
relation to every other part. As, however, 
the structure is the outcome of metabolic 
activity, it follows that the metabolic activity 
of the living body is also organised, every 
aspect of it bearing a definite relation to 


ORGANISM AND ENVIRONMENT 79 


every other aspect. That this is actually so 
has become more and more clear with the 
advance of physiology, particularly in recent 
times. The fundamental mistake of the 
mechanistic physiologists of the middle ot 
last century was that they completely failed 
to realise this. Such processes as _ secre- 
tion, absorption, growth, nervous excitation, 
muscular contraction, were treated as if each 
was an isolable physical or chemical process, 
instead of being what it is, one side of a 
many-sided metabolic activity, of which the 
different sides are indissolubly associated. 
~The relation of the living organism to its 
environment is no less peculiar and specific 
than the relationship of the internal parts and 
activities of the organism itself. Between 
organism and environment a constant active 
exchange is going on. But this exchange, in 
so far as it has any physiological significance, 
is always determined in relation to the rest of 
the living activity of the organism. Whether 
material is to be taken up or given off, 
whether and to what extent the organism 
is to respond to any ‘stimulus,’ all this is 
determined in relation to the life of the 


80 BIOLOGY AND PHYSICAL SCIENCES 


organism as a whole. The living body and 
its physiological environment form an organic 
whole, the parts of which cannot be under- 
stood in separation from one another. 

Our ordinary language as applied to life 
corresponds with these characteristics. We 
naturally speak of a living organism as an 
autonomous active whole, and think of it as 
such. The idea of its being a mechanism 
made up of separable parts, and actuated by 
external causes, is wholly unnatural to us, 
and becomes more and more unnatural the 
more we know about organisms. 

The concept we are using is radically 
different from any physical concept: for in 
conceiving what is living we do not separate 
between matter or structure and its activity. 
The structure itself is conceived as active— 
as alive. 

But the objection may be raised that this is 
only a loose and inaccurate mode of thinking 
and expression: for we know that the living 
substance consists of nothing but matter, 
though we do not yet know in what exact 
form the atoms or molecules are combined. 
This, it must be pointed out clearly, is simply 


ORGANISM AND MATTER 81 


to beg the whole question. It was the com- 
plete and hopeless failure of the material 
conception of a living organism that led to 
our present inquiry. We cannot admit that 
the living ‘substance’ is material. It is the 
very existence of matter as such that is in ques- 
tion—the adequacy of the concept ‘ matter’ to 
express the phenomenon we are considering. 
Let us make no mistake as to what we are 
really discussing. We have parted company 
once and for all with the mechanistic 
philosophy—the notion of a real and self- 
existent material universe; and we must 
remember where we now are. ’ 

What we have found is that the conception 
of the living organism is in common and 
ordinary use, and differs radically from any 
physical conception. We have also seen 
that there is no philosophical reason for 
rejecting this conception. There is no a 
priori reason why we should not, if it helps 
us, take it as the fundamental conception for 
biology, just as the physicist takes the con- 
ceptions of matter and energy as fundamental 
for physics. 

Before going further we must consider a 

¥F 


82 BIOLOGY AND PHYSICAL SCIENCES 


preliminary objection. Whatever the nature 
of the actually living parts of an organism 
may be, all that we can do in investigating 
them, it may be pointed out, is to observe 
and measure the physical and chemical 
changes resulting from their activity. We 
can measure the shortening of a muscle, 
the pull it produces, the oxygen it absorbs, 
the electrical changes which accompany 
its excitation. All these are physical and 
chemical changes, however; and the whole 
of physiology consists, and can only consist, 
of such observations and measurements. It 
must, therefore, from the very nature of its 
data, be a physical and chemical science in so 
far as it is a science at all. 

The reply to this is that apparent physi- 
cal and chemical changes are the signs or 
sensuous data which point to the underlying 
living activity. Just as the physicist has no 
direct detailed knowledge of matter, but in- 
fers its properties and measures its amount 
from various sensuous data, so the physi- 
ologist infers the nature and activities of a 
living organism from sensuous data. But to 
the physiologist the outward appearances of 


TRUE AIM OF BIOLOGY 83 


. physical and chemical change are the sensuous 
data, by bringing which into relation with his 
guiding idea he arrives at physiological know- 
ledge; and what he sees behind the appear- 
ances of changes in form, electrical changes, 
absorption of oxygen, and all the other out- 
ward signs of muscular activity is the meta- 
bolic activity of the living muscle-cells. 

If we assume that the conception of the 
living organism is the fundamental conception 
of biology, it is clear that the aim of biology 
differs entirely from what it would be if 
the mechanistic theory were accepted. All 
attempts to trace the ultimate mechanism 
of life must be given up as meaningless. The 
aim of biology becomes a very different one— 
to trace in increasing detail, and with increas- 
ing clearness, the organic determination which 
the ground conception postulates. The 
bodily processes—for instance, the apparent 
mechanical or chemical processes of movement 
of the limbs, of breathing, of circulation, of 
digestive changes, of the taking up and giving 
off of various forms of matter and energy— 
become nothing but the expression of organic 
activity. Their maintenance and working 


84 BIOLOGY AND PHYSICAL SCIENCES 


during life are only phases of the organic 
determination which is the key to all the 
phenomena of life. They must be looked at 
from the physiological or biological standpoint, 
and not merely from that of the physical 
sciences. The details of bodily structure must 
likewise be interpreted as the expression of 
organic determination. 

Now it seems to me that the actual pro- 
gress of physiology, and of biology generally, 
corresponds exactly with the _ increasing 
realisation of this aim. It has already been 
shown that in tracing the history of phy- 
siology we find that on the whole there 
has been no apparent progress whatsoever 
towards the mechanistic goal. On the 
other hand it is perfectly plain that there has 
been enormous progress, not merely in ascer- 
taining isolated facts, but in tracing organic 
determination in every detail of bodily struc- 
ture and physiological activity. 

To illustrate this conclusion in detail it 
would be necessary to present to you, not 
a single lecture, but a whole text-book of 
physiology. I shall, however, try to give 
a single illustration by tracing roughly part of 


» 


ORGANIC DETERMINATION 85 


the progress of our knowledge in relation to 
the regulation of breathing. 

From the earliest times it was of course 
known that in all the higher animals breathing 
is an essential part of organic activity, as 
mechanical stoppage of the breathing causes 
rapid death. Very little further was known, 
however, until the time of Black, Priestley, 
and Lavoisier, although Mayow, the funda- 
mental importance of whose work was not at 
the time appreciated, had in reality come very 
close to modern ideas. With a single flash 
the whole subject was illuminated by the 
definite discovery of oxygen and carbon 
dioxide and their relation to respiration. 
Henceforth we knew that the necessity for 
breathing, and the regulation of breathing, is 
bound up with the necessity for absorbing 
oxygen and giving off carbon dioxide. Breath- 
ing is of fundamental physiological importance, 
because the consumption of oxygen and re- 
moval of carbon dioxide are fundamental 
organic activities in animals. 

Assuming that an organism is an organ- 
ism, and not a mere machine, we should 
expect to find that these activities are organi- 

F2 


“ 


86 BIOLOGY AND PHYSICAL SCIENCES 


cally determined—determined as in definite 
relation to the whole functional and structural 
activities of the organism, and not merely 
dependent on specific and one-sided conditions, 
such as the abundance of oxygen in the in- 
spired air, or its freedom from carbon dioxide, 
or some mechanical action of the nervous 
system, unrelated to the central organic deter- 
mination. 

Misled by mechanistic conceptions of life, 
various physiologists have, as a matter of fact, 
put forward one-sided theories of this kind, 
and they have invariably turned out to be 
wrong. As an example we may take the 
theory that owing to the structure of the 
respiratory centre, and the properties of the 
afferent nerves coming to it from the lungs, 
breathing goes on, under ordinary conditions, 
automatically and without reference to the 
removal of carbon dioxide or intake of oxygen. 
It was believed that as distention of the lungs 
excites fibres in the vagus-nerve which inhibit 
inspiration, and collapse of the lung correspond- 
ingly excites fibres which excite inspiration, 
normal breathing is regulated by this mechan- 
ism, though the centre also responds to any 


a 


ORGANIC DETERMINATION 87 


unusual want of oxygen or excess of carbon 
dioxide in the blood. 

Now it seemed extremely improbable that 
such a theory could be correct; since living 
organisms do not regulate their affairs in this 
mechanical manner. Thus guided, we rein- 
vestigated the whole question in the Oxford 
Physiological Laboratory, and found that as a 
matter of fact the breathing is, under normal 
conditions, so regulated in man as to re- 
spond with almost incredible exactness to the 
slightest variation in the output of carbon 
dioxide or partial pressure of carbon dioxide 
inthe alveolar air. The vagus nerve-fibres play 
no part in the main regulation, to which their 
influence is only subsidiary, though not unim- 
portant. 

Under ordinary conditions the constancy in 
the pressure of carbon dioxide in the lung 
alveoli provides for the supply of oxygen to 
the lungs and blood; but quite evidently the 
breathing is, under abnormal conditions, regu- 
lated also in direct relation to the oxygen 
supply ; and the action of the lung epithelium, 
the concentration of hemoglobin in the blood, 
and the mode in which oxyhemoglobin is 


88 BIOLOGY AND PHYSICAL SCIENCES 


dissociated in the blood, play an important 
part in helping this regulation. 

The idea which gives unity and coherence 
to the whole of the physiology of respiration 
is that of the organic determination of the 
phenomena. The same idea has to a greater 
or less extent already given, or is in process of 
giving, unity and coherence to the phenomena 
of nutrition, secretion, and circulation. It is 
an idea which guides us at every turn in 
physiological work, and constantly suggests 
new lines of investigation. To leave it out of 
account in physiology, or to treat it as a mere 
‘heuristic principle’ of very uncertain value, 
seems to me about as foolish as it would be to 
reject the idea of mass in chemistry, and retain 
the phlogiston theory, as Priestley and Caven- 
dish actually did till their deaths. By regard- 
ing the structure and activities of a living 
organism as the expression of organic unity 
we arm ourselves with a theory which is 
just as useful in biology as the idea of mass 
in chemistry. Neither the idea of mass nor 
that of organism will enable us to predict 
everything in the chemical and biological 
worlds respectively, but they both help us 


DEFECTS OF CURRENT PHYSIOLOGY 89 


enormously in reducing our observations to 
order. 

When we turn from actual physiological 
investigation to the current text-books on the 
subject we are confronted by the fact that in 
accordance with prevalent philosophical beliefs 
among physiologists, these books are mainly 
written from what is essentially a mechanistic 
standpoint, and follow more or less closely 
the general plan of Ludwig’s famous text- 
book of sixty years ago. An account is 
given of the physical structure and chemical 
materials found in the body and its environ- 
ment, and this account is combined with an 
analysis of how the whole works when the 
various elements so distinguished are brought 
into relation with one another during life. 

In this general plan there is absolutely no 
place left for the living organism as such. We 
find, moreover, that the various ‘ mechanisms’ 
to which the headings of the various chapters 
correspond—the mechanisms of neuro-mus- 
cular activity, nutrition, secretion, absorption, 
etec.—exist, for both reader and author, only 
as ideals on paper ; and at the end the reader 
is perhaps inclined to become a vitalist—per- 


90 BIOLOGY AND PHYSICAL SCIENCES 


hapsnot. The author, too, may probably have 
displayed suspicious vitalistic tendencies. One 
thing, however, is pretty clear—that the in- 
formation supplied with regard to the central 
or ‘elementary’ problems of physiology is 
often so vague as to be of little apparent 
practical importance. The practical physio- 
logical information which a student of medi- 
cine needs and uses is to a large extent only 
picked up afterwards at the bedside or in the 
study of experimental pathology. 

What is the reason for this defect in 
physiological teaching? One might at first 
suppose that whatever general theoretical 
opinions might be held by a _ physiological 
teacher, yet the facts of the science itself 
must be the same, and that in teaching 
the facts, as undoubtedly he does to the 
best of his ability, he must be doing all 
that is possible. But here comes in the 
question, what facts? The facts recorded 
by physiologists are absolutely indefinite in 
number, and only the more important ones 
can be taught. Hence, in accordance with - 
the general plan just alluded to, only those 
facts which bear on the ‘ mechanisms’ of the 


DEFECTS OF CURRENT PHYSIOLOGY 91 


various physiological processes can be taught. 
If, for instance, we are teaching the physi- 
ology of the kidneys, we must teach the main 
facts bearing on the possible mechanism of 
secretion of urine. We must thus discuss 
the possible influence of filtration, diffusion, 
etc., in the process, leaving out of account 
all details which are irrelevant to this dis- 
cussion; and when at the end it turns out 
that the essential mechanism of secretion is 
quite unknown there is nothing further to 
do than pass on to the next subject. Actually 
it is known that, mechanism or no mechanism, 
the kidney fulfils its functions of regulating 
the composition of the blood, and that it 
does so with marvellous delicacy; but facts 
relating to this do not fit into the plan of 
exposition of the subject, and have too much 
of a smack of old-fashioned teleology about 
them. Hence they are ignored completely, 
or scarcely touched upon. 

It is the same with circulation, respiration, 
and every other part of physiological know- 
ledge. The fact that the body lives as a 
whole, each organ or part fulfilling its proper 
functions and adapting itself to every change, 


92 BIOLOGY AND PHYSICAL SCIENCES 


is scarcely touched upon, while a vast mass 
of unrelated and unassimilable mechanical 
detail is carefully recorded and described. 
The fault evidently lies in the general plan 
of exposition. This plan does not fit the 
facts to be described. The living body is 
a living organism, and physiology must treat 
it as such, or else submit to the reproach 
of being a complete failure. The attempt 
to treat physiology on the principles so 
clearly laid down in Ludwig’s Introduction to 
his text-book is as wide of the mark as would 
be an attempt to treat painting and sculpture 
on the basis of a mere knowledge of the 
chemistry and physics of paint and marble. 
Teaching and investigation must begin, con- 
tinue, and end with the presupposition that 
the body is a living organism, which must 
be seen as a whole if it is to be seen at all. 
To shut our eyes to the central fact of living 
organic existence is to shut our eyes to 
physiology itself, and to biology generally. 
It does not matter what aspect, or what 
portion of physiology or biology we are 
studying: we are always face to face with 
living organisms as wholes or parts of 


REPRODUCTION AND DEATH 93 


organic wholes. The divisions of the subject 
are due, either to the particular organisms 
studied, or to the particular methods of 
investigation which we happen to be capable 
of using to advantage. In so far as we are 
in earnest with the work, and are not 
blinded by wrong theories, we are always, 
both in physiological and morphological 
investigation, studying an organism as a 
whole. 

In the case of the higher organisms we 
are of course dealing with a compound 
organism; and we have all shades between 
highly organised compound organisms and 
more or less indefinite collective organisms 
such as a colony or a whole species. In these 
organisms there is constant active main- 
tenance, constant renewal, constant breaking 
down and reproduction of the living struc-) 
ture; and this is of the very essence of our 
conception of life. Reproduction is not in 
itself a problem, but an axiom; for all living 
structure is active structure; and it lives in 
actively maintaining itself and reproducing 
its structure. 

In normal reproduction and death, and in 


94 BIOLOGY AND PHYSICAL SCIENCES 


all instinctive social activity, the individual 
organism shows itself to be more than a mere 
individual: it belongs to a wider organic 
whole. Death is certainly not the mere 
mechanical wearing out of the organic 
machine: for the organism, as we have 
already seen, is no machine. Not only in 
reproducing itself as a whole, but also in the 
metabolic processes by which it is changing 
its substance at every moment, does it flout 
such a conception. So far as we can at 
present understand the matter, the physiology 
of death, and that of reproductive and social 
activity in all their wide ramifications, belong 
to the physiology of the species. The indi- 
vidual organism, like the individual cell in 
a complex organism, belongs to a wider 
organic whole, apart from which much of its 
life is unintelligible. 

It may be argued that in postulating 
such a thing as the existence of life as a 
specific entity we are abandoning all attempt 
at explanation. We are certainly aban- 
doning the attempt at causal explanation; 
but in doing so we are only abandoning 
the philosophical ideas which have already 


KANT AND HEGEL 95 


been shown to be defective and irreconcilable 
with experience in relation to the phenomena 
of life. This part of our experience implies 
the conception of life. By a process of 
abstraction from the distinctive facts of life 
we can, it is true, regard organisms as simply 
so much matter, with so much _ energy 
_ passing through them. If they had turned 
out to be capable of interpretation as 
mechanisms this would have been no ab- 
straction, but a correct way of regarding 
them. But since they are what they are, 
their structure must be regarded as living 
structure, and their activity as living activ- 
ity, both structure and activity being the 
expression of an organic and _ indivisible 
whole. The ideas of matter and energy are 
nothing but ideas, and in the case of life 
these ideas are united and transformed in the 
idea of the living organism. 

This leads us back to the philosophical 
conclusions of Kant and his successors. For 
Kant the categories or general conceptions 
under which our experience is ordered were 
sO many separate conceptions unrelated to 
one another. We might roughly compare 


96 BIOLOGY AND PHYSICAL SCIENCES 


them to the chemical elements as they 
appeared to science before the discovery of 
the periodic law and the breaking down and 
probable building up of elements. Hegel 
pointed out that not only was Kant’s list 
of categories incomplete, but that the cate- 
gories bear a natural relation to one another, 
the lower being the more abstract or empty 
general conceptions furthest from reality, and 
the higher being the more concrete and 
definite ones nearest to reality. If, for in- 
stance, we regarded our experience as con- 
sisting of nothing but qualitatively different 
data we should be using an empty and 
abstract category. If we regarded it as a 
world of substances acting on one another 
we should be seeing it under a much less 
empty category, and the qualities and their 
changes would now appear as the qualities 
and changes of substances. If we regarded 
it as a world of living organisms we should 
be using a still higher and less empty 
category ; for substance, quality, and activity 
would now be united in a conception out 
of which they all issue, the activity being 
no longer regarded as an accident of the 


o 


KANT AND HEGEL 97 


substance or matter, and quality being no 
longer a mysterious attribute of substance. 

It is evident that we cannot apply this 
or that category at will. Specific categories 
seem, as it were, to be embodied in all that 
_ we experience. By no mere arbitrary process 
of thought can I make a piece of stone into 
a living organism or vice versa. I can, how- 
ever, deliberately abstract from what the 
living organism really is, and regard it as 
~ simply a material system. This, indeed, is 
what the mechanistic theory of life invites 
me to do. I can also abstract from what 
the stone is, and regard it as simply a patch 
of colour. This, or something like this, was 
what Berkeley and Hume invited us to do, 
‘pointing out that the stone, as a substance 
outside us, is only a metaphysical product 
of our imagination, and that all that is 
really experienced is a patch of colour. But, 
as Kant showed in principle, we cannot thus 
divest our world of its meaning: we cannot 
reduce higher to lower categories, and thus 
explain the higher away: we find that the 
higher categories are embodied in the very 
texture of our experience. 

G 


98 BIOLOGY AND PHYSICAL SCIENCES 


When we examine the process of know- 
ledge itself we find that it is a progressive 
defining of our experience in terms of funda- 
mental conceptions or categories: also a 
gradual passing from lower, more abstract or 
indefinite conceptions to higher, more con- 
erete or definite ones. This is the course of 
all scientific investigation. It is only with 
infinite travail and pains that our experience 
gradually defines itself in terms of higher and 
more definite conceptions. A living organism 
is not given to us complete in thought all at 
once: it only gradually reveals itself more 
and more definitely in the course of long and 
arduous biological investigation. It is the 
same on a lower plane for the physical world, 
or for the mathematical world of abstract 
form and quantitative relations. But from 
the very nature of the categories or funda- 
mental conceptions themselves all true know- 
ledge must be a gradual revelation of the 
lower or more abstract in terms of the higher 
or more concrete aspects of reality; and as 
the conception of organism is a higher and 
more concrete conception than that of matter 
and energy, science must ultimately aim at 


SIGNIFICANCE OF EVOLUTION 99 


gradually interpreting the physical world of 
matter and energy in terms of the biological 
conception of organism. No lower claim than 
this will satisfy the ideals of biological investi- 
gation: of this we may be well assured. 

At the time of Kant and his immediate 
successors biology had hardly begun to be 
conscious of her strength. Living organisms 
seemed, as it were, to be at the best only 
dotted about here and there in the midst of 
a totally foreign physical universe. Kant 
assigned to them a very doubtful place in his 
philosophy, and Hegel in his Philosophy of 
Nature represented Nature as a sort of waste 
in which any and every kind of existence is 
strewed about indiscriminately—a conception 
repugnant to true science. Meanwhile the 
advance of the natural sciences has _pro- 
foundly changed our outlook on Nature. 
First and foremost we have come to realise 
the fact of evolution. The true significance 
of this fact is a very different one from what 
is still very generally supposed. At first 
evolution appeared in popular thought, em- 
bodied, for instance, in the writings of 
Herbert Spencer, as a derivation of the 


100 BIOLOGY AND PHYSICAL SCIENCES 


organic from the inorganic. We have seen 
already, however, that, evolution or no evolu- 
tion, there is not the remotest possibility of 
deriving the organic from the inorganic. 
Evolution, therefore, takes on a very different 
significance. In tracing life back and back 
towards what appears at first to be the in- 
organic we are not seeking to reduce the 
organic to the inorganic, but the inorganic 
to the organic. The apparently indefinite 
microscopical aggregations of formless colloid 
material—‘ sarcode’ or ‘protoplasm ’—which 
were at first taken for the origins of life from 
the inorganic, have gradually turned out to 
be definite living organisms. But biology 
will not stop at these: for they must have 
been evolved from something more primitive. 
She will gradually push her advance victori- 
ously further and further into the domain of 
the apparently inorganic. 

The premonitory signs of this advance are 
not lacking. For nearly a century—since 
the days of John Dalton—the chemical atom 
was the ultimate term of physical and 
chemical investigation. The world seemed 
to be resolved into a world of atoms, in 


f » 


THE WORLD OF ATOMS 101 
1oSsos 


which, as du Bois Reymond pointed out, 
there was no place for life in any such sense 
as that which I have endeavoured to depict 


in this lecture. Recent discoveries in physics 


and chemistry have, however, completely 
shattered this conception, and with it that of 
matter and energy. We now see physicists 
and chemists groping after biological ideas. 
No one can yet tell what conceptions will 
emerge from the ruins of the atomic theory; 
but it is at least evident that the extension of 
biological conceptions to the whole of Nature 
may be much nearer than seemed conceivable 
even a few years ago. When the day of that 
extension comes the physical and chemical 
world as we now conceive it—the world of 
atoms and energy—will be recognised as no- 
thing but an appearance, though for practical 
purposes it will still remain very useful. It 
will stand fully confessed as a world of 
abstractions like that of the pure mathemati- 
cians. Meanwhile it is already a world of 
abstractions to the biologist who has faith 
in the principle of evolution and also in 
the fundamental conception of the living 
organism. 
G2 


TINCOLN BIBLE INSTITUTE 


102 BIOLOGY AND PHYSICAL SCIENCES 


To one point with reference to the bio- 
logical conception of a living organism no re- 
ference has yet been made. Living organisms 
always, or nearly always, appear to be marvel- 
lously ‘adapted’ to their physical environ- 
ment. Yet this adaptation is not of the 
essence of the biological conception of an 
organism. We know, also, that organisms 
may develop which, in one way or another, 
are so misshapen or defective that they 
cannot survive, though they have all the 
essential characteristics of organisms. They 
maintain their existences as organisms for a 
short time, blindly struggling, as it were, to 
preserve the defects which make them in- 
capable of surviving. 

Organic life is ‘blind’: each organism 
blindly struggles to maintain its own exist- 
ence or that of its species. We can only 
explain the actual marvellous and intricate 
‘teleological’ adaptation of organism and 
physical environment by the fact that, as 
pointed out by Darwin and Wallace, those 
organisms which are not so adapted must 
disappear. Even if we could see far enough 
to be able to regard as organic the whole of 


oe ee 


ra 


THE STRUGGLE BETWEEN ORGANISMS 103 


what appears as inorganic, the entire world 
would still appear as a blind struggle between 
different organisms. Of this conflict, whether 
we regard it as conflict between organisms 
themselves, or between organisms and physical 
environment, we can give no biological inter- 
pretation, and are thus forced back on a 
physical interpretation. From the standpoint 
of ideal biology organism and environment 
would be one. The organism would be 
not something in a more or less foreign 
environment, but in its own environment, 
which it has grown in, and which has been 
part of its very nature from the outset. -Of 
the actual foreignness or imperfection in the 
environment biology as such can give no 
account. 

This discussion brings us to the subject of 
the last lecture. In the higher organisms, at 
least, we find distinct evidence of a quite new 
factor—consciousness. A conscious organism 
is, as it were, fighting the inorganic world, not 
blindly but with the weapons of that inorganic 
world itself. It answers blow with counter- 
blow, and physical force with counter-force. 
The conscious organism is aware of the inor- 


104 BIOLOGY AND PHYSICAL SCIENCES 


ganic world as such, and reacts as in presence 
of that world, whether it be real or unreal. 

In concluding this lecture let us survey the 
progress made in our discussion. We have 
seen that the idea of the physical universe as 
a world of self-existent matter and energy 
is only a temporary working hypothesis by 
means of which we are able to introduce a 
certain amount of order and coherence into 
a large part of our experience. The fact that, 
as shown in the last lecture, this hypothesis 
breaks down in connection with the pheno- 
mena of life need not, therefore, puzzle us. 
The phenomena of life involve another and 
radically different conception of reality, and I 
have endeavoured to define this conception, 
and point out that it is actually used as a 
working hypothesis by biologists, and that by 
its means we introduce order and intelligibility 
into biology, whereas there is no such order 
or intelligibility if the mechanistic theory of 
life be adopted. The idea of life is nearer to 
reality than the ideas of matter and energy, 
and therefore the presupposition of ideal 
biology is that inorganic can ultimately be 
resolved into organic phenomena, and that 


PHYSICAL AND BIOLOGICAL REALITY 105 


the physical world is thus only the appearance 
of a deeper reality which is as yet hidden 
from our distinct vision, and can only be seen 
dimly with the eye of scientific faith, We 
have seen, finally, that the ideal biological 
world is never completely realised. 


LECTURE IV 
PERSONALITY 


In the previous lectures I have endeavoured 
to follow out what is involved in our observa- 
tions of living organisms looked at apart from 
their conscious activities, and from a purely 
biological standpoint. When, however, we 
examine conscious activity or personality we 
find that we are in presence of an order of 
observations differing greatly from those with 
which biology deals. 

We have seen that a biological phenomenon 
apart from the other phenomena, co-existent 
in space, which we designate as the life of an 
organism, has no definite meaning. In con- 
scious activity, however, there is in addition 
no meaning in any phenomenon of perception 
or volition isolated 7 time from other 
phenomena. A perception includes not only 


co-existent perceptions, but also preceding 
106 


oo wilted 


a ar mea 
os 


CONSCIOUS ACTIVITY 107 


and succeeding events. In perceiving a 
printed word on this paper we perceive it not 
only as part of what else we see at the moment 
on the paper, but as part of the words seen 
previously and anticipated later on the same 
and other pages, and as part, also, of a mullti- 
tude of other past and anticipated phenomena 
in our conscious existence. Even as regards 
the letters of each word the same holds good. 
The significance of each letter depends on its 
connection with preceding and succeeding 
letters. We can see this point still more 
simply and clearly when we analyse the 
perception of music. Thus both the past 
and future, not merely the present, enter into 
perception. The perception includes the past 
and the future. The past perceptions are not 
done with except indirectly through the 
present effects: which they may have pro- 
duced: they are still directly active in the 
present ; and future perceptions are likewise 
active in the present, since anticipation is just 
as important as memory in determining the 
nature of a present perception. Interpreta- 
tion, tradition, and ideals are essential elements 
in perception. Past, present, and future are 


108 PERSONALITY 


thus not outside one another in perception, 
but co-equally present: hence personality is 
not existence in time, but succession is a 
distinction or principle of order within person- 
ality, as Kant was in modern times the first 
to point out clearly. The ideal world-equation 
of Laplace could not be applied to conscious 
activity, since the separate terms in the equa- 
tion would be indefinable. The controversy 
over free-will and determinism has likewise 
no meaning. 

Perceptions belong to an orderly world of 
experience in which past, present, and future 
times are co-present. The principles which 
we distinguish in this orderliness are those of 
the various mathematical, physical, biological, 
and humanistic sciences. Degree in the 
clearness of perception depends on the degree 
to which these principles are explicitly 
embodied in perception. 

Explicit perception or ‘ exact’ knowledge 
is quite evidently always selective. One 
particular principle of order in experience is 
emphasised to the exclusion of others, so that 
knowledge represents an abstraction from 
actual experience. Thus we can distinguish 


SCIENTIFIC ABSTRACTIONS 109 


elements in experience as simply arranged 
outside one another in order of time. This 
represents the highest degree of abstraction, 
since the elements of experience are only 
regarded as arranged outside one another, 
apart altogether from the various other rela- 
tionships which also define them, and apart 
even from the fact that succession is a relation, 
so that unrelated elements of experience 
succeeding one another in time would repre- 
sent a mere contradiction in terms. We can 
also regard the elements of experience as 
simply arranged spatially, and this is the 
attitude of pure geometrical science. -In 
pure kinematics co-present relations of both 


space and time are alone considered. 


The physical conception of experience 
represents a less abstract treatment of it. 
Relations in space and time are explicitly 
recognised as relations of units of something 
enduring—substance—acting on one another 
in accordance with definable laws. Hence we 
can quantitatively distinguish the substance 
in spite of its modifications in consequence 
of the mutual action, and also distinguish 
quantitatively the modifications resulting 


110 PERSONALITY 


from mutual action. If we neglect the funda- 
mental fact that the physical world is a world 
of experience—that substances or ‘bodies’ 
and their reactions with one another have no 
intelligible meaning except as related to one 
another within our experience—the physical 
world appears as a world of self-existent 
things, among which our own bodies are 
comprised. 

The biological conception of experience 
represents a still less abstract treatment of it. 
The parts of an organism and its environment, 
together with their mutual influences on one 
another, are recognised as expressions of a 
whole which actively maintains itself through 
change, constantly reproducing what it loses, 
and in development or degeneration still 
maintaining the expression of the whole. 
Biological experience cannot be stated in 
terms of the independent and self-existent 
‘bodies’ of physical experience and their 
mutual reactions. The parts which participate 
in life are seen not to be independent of one 
another, but only to be definable through 
their participation in life. The behaviour of 
the dead body or a dead part of an organism 


THE HUMANISTIC SCIENCES 111 


can be interpreted physically; but between 
what we interpret as life and what we interpret 
as mere mechanism there is a gulf across which 
we do not at present see clearly, as was pointed 
out in detail in the previous two lectures. 
We certainly cannot reduce life to mechanism; 
but we do not yet see clearly how to extend 
_ biological conceptions to what we must still 
_ distinguish as the inorganic world, or even to 
innumerable details of what we observe within 
the living bodies of organisms. 
: The humanistic sciences deal with the world 
~ as a world of conscious experience and conscious 
activity, and embody a much less abstract and 
more penetrating interpretation of experience 
than even that of biology. Experience is 
regarded as made up of elements which are 
manifestations of conscious activity or person- 
ality. The interpretations which are made 
use of in the mathematical, physical, and 
biological sciences are interpretations of human 
experience and lie within it. In actual fact, 
for instance, even the simplest succession in 
- time has no meaning except as a revelation of. 
elements co-present to one another in con- 
sciousness. Nor have substance or energy or 


112 PERSONALITY 


living organisms any meaning apart from the 
co-presence in consciousness of the successive 
signs through which they manifest themselves. 
We can assign no meaning whatsoever to 
‘objective’ worlds of time, space, matter, 
energy, and life, apart from perceptions of 
them. David Hume’s reasoning on this point 
is conclusive. The world we know is the 
world which appears to us within conscious- 
ness, and with its elements co-present to one 
another and exhibiting definite and orderly 
relationships of succession, extension, identity 
of substance and energy, life. Hence the 
humanistic sciences include within themselves 
the worlds of human abstraction with which 
the more abstract sciences deal. The latter 
sciences represent the work of human abstrac- 
tion, employed for human convenience, and 
constituting only preliminary knowledge. 
Their development can be traced in human 
history; and when, through absence of philo- 
sophical understanding, their human origin 
ceases to be recognised, confusion is inevitable. 
A science divorced from its historical develop- 
ment, and taught dogmatically as if it repre- 
sented some ‘objective’ reality apart altogether 


PERCEPTION AND VOLITION 113 


from human experience and the long process 
of human effort which has built up the science, 
is the dead science of an inferior text-book. 
Nothing is more misleading than the idea that 
an uninstructed person has only to open his 
eyes and passively ‘observe’ in order to be 
convinced of ‘ scientific facts.’ 

We are apt to regard perception as some- 
thing passive and entirely distinct from volition 
or voluntary action. When, however, we look 
more closely it becomes evident that percep- 
tion involves deliberate activity in the selection 
of what is perceived, or in the abstraction of 
what is allowed to become prominent in con- 
sciousness from what is disregarded. A 
physicist and a biologist placed in a given 
position will be apt to see quite different 
things, or interpret them quite differently ; 
and a man with other interests will see differ- 
ently from either of them. The further action 
of each of them will accord with their different 
perceptions. Perception is thus nothing but 
a step in voluntary action, and indeed the 
most important step. The further step con- 
sisting in overt movements of the limbs, etc., is 
in no sense more active than perception itself, 

H 


114 PERSONALITY 


so that in analysing the nature of perception 
we are also analysing that of volition. 

Let us now examine in further detail the 
phenomena of conscious activity. When we 
look at the living body from the physical 
standpoint we can trace towards the brain 
impulses transmitted from outside through 
the sense-organs. Unless these impulses reach 
the brain through nerves there is no sensation 
or perception. Moreover if the brain is seriously 
injured or destroyed all the signs of conscious- 
ness disappear. Local injuries of the brain 
will also result in the definite blotting out of 
certain kinds of perception, memory, or 
capacities of voluntary response, so that per- 
ceptions, memories, and volitions seem to be 
localised in different parts of the brain. Thus 
from the abstract physical standpoint we are 
apparently driven to conclude that different 
parts of the brain are the ‘seats’ of different 
forms of conscious activity, and that con- 
sciousness itself is only an accompaniment, 
however mysterious, of the physical and 
chemical changes occurring in the brain. 

But now let us look at the facts more 
closely, as a physiologist looks at them. When 


sg : 


” 


MEANING OF CEREBRAL LOCALISATION 115 


we examine the physiological activities of the 
brain we find that it is in constant active 
connection through afferent nerves with all 
parts of the body and so with the surrounding 
environment. A response to an afferent 
impulse through a sense-organ is determined, 
not merely by the nature and strength of this 
impulse, but also by the coincident inpouring 
of impulses from all parts of the body and 
surrounding environment. If, for instance, we 
cut off a large part of these impulses by section 
of afferent nerves—for instance the afferent or 
sensory roots of the spinal cord—the result is 
paralysis of the parts thus deprived of lacal 
afferent stimuli, although the afferent or motor 
nerves are intact. This paralysis may be as 
effective as if the motor nerves themselves had 
been severed. A nervous response is also 
directly dependent on the amount and quality 
of the blood-supply to the nervous system, 
and thus indirectly on the functional activity 
of the rest of the organism, and on its relations 
to the environment through nutrition and 
respiration. A very slight excess of carbonic 
acid or deficiency of oxygen has a marked 
effect on the nervous responses to afferent 


116 PERSONALITY 


stimuli; and immediate loss of consciousness 
results from great excess or deficiency. Equally 
marked effects result from all sorts of minute 
alterations in the quality of the blood, such, 
for instance, as are caused by disease or 
excision of the thyroid gland or failure of 
normal function in the kidneys or liver. Thus 
the response to a sensory stimulus is due also 
to innumerable inpouring chemical stimuli. 
With every advance in physiology the ex- 
perimental evidence shows more and more 
clearly that we cannot separate off and specify 
the occurrences in separate parts of the body, 
and particularly of the central nervous system, 
as we can for practical purposes separate off 
and specify the occurrences in different parts 
of a machine. In nervous responses, and more 
particularly conscious responses, the whole 
nervous system, and mediately the whole 
organism and its environment, are involved. 
The response is a manifestation of the whole 
life of the organism, and not merely the 
response of the brain or a definite part of it. 
From the physical standpoint we seem to lose 
ourselves in an indefinite tangle of reactions 
when we seek to analyse what is happening in 


’ 


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN 117 


anervousresponse. The ideas which Descartes 
formed of the mechanical working of the 
nervous system and of the body as a whole 
were very far from being an adequate repre- 
sentation of the facts. Between his con- 
ception and that reached through experimental 
investigation in recent times there is a profound 
difference. 

When we consider the character of physio- 
logical responses as a whole we find that they 
are of such a nature as to contribute to the 
maintenance of the normal life of the organism 
as a whole; and in nervous responses there is 
no exception to the rule that life is continuous 
organic maintenance through adaptation to 
changing conditions. From this point of view 
the responses become intelligible and therefore 
predictable, since the undefinable complexity 
of what we endeavour to interpret as physical 
and chemical reaction resolves itself naturally 
just as in the case of other physiological re- 
sponses referred to in the previous lecture. 

An organism considered simply as such is 
blind to its experience. Its reactions are 
simply the expression of its nature. It may 
be said to possess ‘organic memory’ in the 

H2 


118 PERSONALITY 


sense that it behaves as if it always remem- 
bered its own particular nature and physio- 
logical environment as an organism, blindly 
maintaining and reproducing this from genera- 
tion to generation. Organic memory in this 
sense is, however, a different thing from 
conscious memory. A plant possesses ‘organic 
memory,’ but this does not constitute what 
can properly be called memory, nor do we 
regard it as evidence of consciousness. ‘To 
‘organic memory’ we can attribute the 
acquired ease and efficiency with which some 
physiological activities come to be carried out 
—for instance the ease with which the nervous 
reactions involved in walking, running, or 
riding a bicycle are made after practice, or 
the ease with which some specific infection is 
repelled after a previous attack or the action 
of a suitable vaccine, or the fact that organic 
structures tend to grow with use. All such 
cases seem, however, to be nothing but 
examples of the same blind processes of active 
maintenance through adaptation which are 
characteristic ofall life. These processes often 
require considerable time to complete them- 
selves or to pass away, and they involve not 


ae ies 


MEMORY 119 


merely the activities of structure, but structure 
itself, since organic structure is an expression 
of organic activity. To an altered environ- 
ment, in whatever way it may arise, what we 
interpret as a mere living organism responds 
blindly by such modification of activity and 
structure as tends for the moment to maintain 
the normal. Is this all, however? In the 
phenomena of conscious activity. we find 
definitely that the interpretation just given is 
inadequate. 

The characteristic distinction of a conscious 
organism is that it ‘learns’ from experience. 
This signifies that a conscious nervous response 
is determined not merely by the simultaneously 
inflowing influences from all parts of the 
living body and its environment, but also by 
what, in order of time, has preceded or will 
succeed. From the physical, or even the 
biological, point of view such a fact appears 
as a completely unexpected and unintelligible 
‘revelation.’ Yet it is a fact which must be 
insisted on as fundamental in the interpreta- 
tion of our experience of personality. We 
are unable to reconcile it with the physical 
or biological interpretations; but it is there 


120 PERSONALITY 


as a fact of experience, and if it is inconsistent 
with the physical and biological interpretations 
we can only conclude that they are both of 
them only provisional and imperfect inter- 
pretations. 

Dynamic memory and _prescience—the 
traditions and ideals of conscious personality— 
ean be distinguished from the mere power of 
calling up images. of the past, or transferring 
them to imaginary places and times. These 
images of the past seem to be only the effects 
of past events—records which can be read, 
but not in themselves exercising any appreci- 
able direct influence on the present or future. 
Powers of detailed memory are notoriously 
different from powers of intelligence and 
imagination. It is the present and future 
significance of what is remembered — the 
embodiment of experience in character—that 
counts in conscious activity. Detailed 
memory may be largely blotted out during 
lapse of time, or by injury to the brain, just 
as the information which comes through one 
or more of the senses may be interfered with, 
or ceases during sleep. The faculty of 
recording images of events in memory may 


TIME AND SPIRITUAL UNITY 121 


also be greatly diminished, as when a man is 
under the influence of considerable shortage 
of oxygen. Failure of detailed memory is, 
however, a very different thing from failure 
of intelligence ; and, indeed, persons are often 
so overburdened with what they have to 
remember or observe that their intelligence 
suffers. A student, artist, or person in any 
specially responsible position, must have 
leisure to think. History consists not simply 
in records but in their interpretation. This 
interpretation is never complete, since the 
present and past are in dynamic relation, so 
that the past is constantly showing its own 
nature in the present and thus being constantly 
re-born, while the present is also showing its 
own nature through the ever-present influence 
in it of the past. History must thus be read 
backwards as well as forwards, and is con- 
stantly being re-interpreted. Similarly we can 
trace the development of an individual person 
through the abiding and ever-broadening 
meaning and practical outcome of the events 
in his life-history. It is not the mere isolated 
events in his history that matter, but the 
living spiritual unity manifested in them, 


=% 
122 PERSONALITY ; 


Unity of the past, present, and future, and 
not merely the unity throughout space- 
separation of a living organism and _ its 
environment, is what constitutes personality 
or spiritual unity. Just as a conscious response 
is from the physiological standpoint no mere 
response of the brain but a manifestation of 
the whole life of an organism, so from the 
psychological standpoint it is no mere organic 
response isolated in time, but the manifesta- 
tion of a spiritual unity which holds time- 
relations within itself. A person is no mere 
physical body among other bodies, no mere 
living organism, but a spiritual being which 
neither physical nor biological conceptions are 
capable of representing. 

When we look further at the spiritual unity 
of personality we seem to find that it is 
centred in an individual self corresponding to 
what from the biological standpoint is an 
individual organism. ‘The details of structure 
and activity in which the life of this organism 
manifests itself are, however, re-interpreted 
in personality as ‘interests’ of value, and the 
person appears as their meeting-point in space 
and time, from which time-determinations 


arte te 


SPURIOUS OBJECTIVITY 123 


extend backwards and forwards, space-deter- 
minations extend outwards, and interests and 
values are centred. What I perceive is what 
interests me, and my actions are determined 
in my own interests. 

At first sight it might, perhaps, appear that 
the surrounding inorganic world is, or at least 
can be, perceived merely as a physical world 
of matter and energy, or that if we seem to 
perceive it as anything else this is mere 
anthropocentric illusion. It is true that in 
practical life we regard the inorganic world as 
a world of our own interests. The engineer 


or the workman treats the physical world 


from the utilitarian standpoint of its uses and 
hindrances to human interests. But reality, 
we are accustomed to think, is something 
apart from this accidental view of it, and what 
we really see is a world of matter, energy, and 
their distribution as described by the physical 
sciences. 

If we look back, however, at the historical 
development of scientific ideas we find that 
they have sprung out of the needs of practical 
life. The tradesmen who devised and used 
the balance, and the engineers who measured 


124 PERSONALITY 


in horse-power and foot-pounds, had practical 
ideas of mass and energy long before men of 
science definitely formulated and extended 
these conceptions. Physiology originated in 
medicine, and chemistry in practical arts of 
manufacture. The sciences are built on ideas 
which have their roots in human needs. These 
ideas are changing and developing with 
human progress, and never escape from being 
anthropocentric. In the extraordinarily 
interesting developments of physics and 
chemistry during the last few years we have 
been witnessing profound changes in what to 
the last generation appeared to be conceptions 
of atoms, mass, time, and space, that had been 
established for all time. When separated 
from the mother earth of human experience 
and dogmatically accepted as ultimate repre- 
sentations of reality, scientific ideas cease to 
live. What we see in our world is determined 
by our attention, which itself is determined 
by our needs. Hence the teleological deter- 
mination of personality includes the whole of 
our world of experience, and is what gives 
unity and coherence to it. Nature as we see 
her is not a world in which conceptions or 


t 


rm 


IMPERFECTION OF LOGICAL TOOLS 125 


‘categories’ are strewed about indiscrimin- 
ately. Kant’s ‘synthetic unity of appercep- 
tion’ is more than a sort of general enclosure 
in which this strewing about occurs. In 
‘Nature’ personality is actively present 
everywhere. 

We can in thought abstract from, or leave 
out of account for the moment, the teleological 
or humanistic nature of our world of experience, 
and treat the world as if it, or part of it, 


existed apart from ourselves. We are in fact 


constantly making this abstraction, leaving 
out of account the fact that all our practical 
and scientific ideas are human ideas, the 
product of human development, and the out- 
come of human needs. Wecan also regard 
human activity as simply the action of one 
self-existent thing on other self-existent things 
outside it. This abstraction from reality is, 
like all rule-of-thumb methods, useful and 
even unavoidable in practical life; but it as 
an abstraction from reality ; and in considering 
the nature of personality we cannot make any 
such abstraction. The self-existent things 
are in reality the creation of our own thought 
—the product of logical tools used for our 


126 PERSONALITY 


own purposes. The imperfection of these 
tools and their products is our own imperfec- 
tion: for they are part of ourselves and belong 
to our personality. In scientific work we are 
not simply studying passively something which 
is apart from and outside us: we are just as 
much personally responsible for our work and 
its outcome as any ordinary workman. He has 
to study his materials and tools just as we do, 
and our study of them is only part of the teleo- 
logical ordering of our world, just as in his case. 
Our theories are practical theories, just as his 
are, though he is putting them to immediate 
use, while we are looking to their future use. 
The world we see is a world of personality. 
We can reach this conclusion either from the 
purely philosophical side, with Hume, Kant, 
and the other philosophers, through the 
abstract demonstration that our world is the 
world as we see it. Or we can reach it from 
the side of human history, through the more 
concrete demonstration that the world we see 
is the world which by painful human effort 
we have gradually fashioned, and are con- 
tinuously fashioning further in thought and 
action, The claim sometimes made on behalf 


CELE RT 


THE INDIVIDUAL SELF 127 


of natural science, that its interpretations 


represent absolute reality, independent of 
man himself, cannot be maintained. 

At first sight it might seem that the con- 
ception of the world as a world of personality 
involves the inference that the existence of 
the world is bound up with our own individual 
existence—with the existence of a person who 
was born and will certainly die. Such an 
inference would, however, be wholly mistaken. 
There is nothing more certain than the exist- 
ence and compelling power of duty which is 
no mere duty to the individual self, and of 
truth which is no mere truth for an individual. 
This signifies at once that personality is no 
mere individual personality. The personality 
of any individual represents a spiritual inherit- 
ance and environment living and active 
throughout his present, past, and future. He 
sees with the eyes of his mother, father, 
teachers, and numberless others with whom 
he has come into contact: also through the 
light of oral tradition, books, and other 
records. His perceptions are equally the ex- 
pression of inherited character already showing 
itself in his earliest infancy. He is what he 


128 PERSONALITY 


is through his relations to others, and particu- 
larly to the stock he has sprung from. His 
personality was no tabula rasa at birth, nor as 
already shown could the metaphor of markings 
on a tablet represent his perceptions. He is 
his spiritual self—a self not existing in time 
or space, but within which distinctions of time — 
and space, of matter, organisms and other 
persons are present. ‘The other persons are 
not outside his own spiritual self, but within 
it. He feels, perceives, and acts with and 
through them, just as he feels, perceives and 
acts through his own sense-organs, brain, and 
other organs. Individuals as such are born 
and die, but the personality which is their 
reality cannot be born or die. 

This may seem to be mere picturesque 
imagery or unintelligible mysticism, but is not 
so. It represents the conclusion which philo- 
sophy leads up to; and philosophy is only the 
analysis of experience, taking the whole of 
experience into account, and not merely 
certain aspects of it. 

Biological investigation has shown that life 
is continuous from generation to generation. 
Pasteur’s investigations put an end finally to 


e 


THE INDIVIDUAL AND SOCIETY 129 


the old beliefs in spontaneous generation. 
There is no break between parent and off- 
spring, between individuals of the same species, 
genus, or family; and though as yet we cannot 
clearly trace life back into what we at present, 
for want of fuller knowledge, call the inorganic 
world, this may be possible in the future. We 
also know that the life of an individual higher 
organism is the expression of the lives of the 
countless cells which we can distinguish in its 
body and which are constantly dying and 
being born: also that the life of a cell is 


_ itself the expression of the lives of countless 


simpler units of life, of which part are always 
disappearing, while others reproduce them- 


selves. The individual unit of life reveals its 
_ true nature in the wider life which it partici- 


pates in, and this nature is revealed in dying 
just as much as in living. 
It is no otherwise with personality, although 


_ personality cannot, like life, be regarded as an 


existence within time. It is only in social life 
that a person realises his real nature. Regard 
for truth that is truth for others, and regard 
for duty that is duty to others, belong to his 


nature. Personality must also be continuous 


I 


130 PERSONALITY 


from generation to generation, though for the 
present we seem to lose clear sight of it in 
early infancy, and completely lose sight of — 
it in germ-cells and other individual cells or 
lower organisms. We can, however, trace its 
continuity in human history and ideals; and 
we realise its existence through the answers 
to the awakening calls of what appeals to 
humanity, or even to a race of men. The 
prophets are those who make calls that reveal 
past, present, and future. 

During the British retreat from Mons in 
August 1914 a rumour arose that there had 
been seen among the rear-guards the forms of 
old-time English bowmen firing their arrows 
at the advancing enemy. How this rumour 
originated no man could tell, but in spite of 
its apparent absurdity it put heart into the 
retreating army, for there was deep vision in 
it. The bowmen were there, but dressed in 
khaki, and fighting, not with bows but with 
rifles, machine-guns, and field-guns. Side by 
side with the bowmen, and also dressed in 
khaki, were the stout Scottish spearmen who 
had faced them at Bannockburn and Flodden. 
But those advancing men in field-grey were 


EVOLUTION AND PERSONALITY = 131 


also men of old history. Each had answered 
his country’s call; and had it not been for 
such men on both sides, and not merely on 
one side, the war would have been ended in a 
few days, in spite of all the accumulated 
armaments and organisation. From genera- 
tion to generation there can be no break in 
personality. 

As was remarked in the previous lecture, we 
seem unable, from the purely biological stand- 
point, to give any account of progressive evolu- 
tion except as the outcome of a blind struggle 
for existence. But for conscious personality 
the struggle is no longer blind: the future is 
foreseen and fore-ordained if only to a limited 
extent; and the past is remembered and 
acted on. This is not only so for individual 
persons but the traditions and ideals of a race 
represent its memory and foresight. From 
the standpoint of personality evolution takes 
on a new aspect, and is no longer a blind 
process. 

In human beings we cannot as yet distinguish 
clearly between the conscious existence of the 
individual as a whole, and that of sub-person- 
alities, although we seem to come near this in 


132 PERSONALITY 


the case of dreams and various abnormal 
mental conditions. Psychological study will 
certainly bring us still nearer. We may con- 
fidently anticipate that just as individual 
members can be distinguished in a society, 
so also distinguishable elements of personality 
will be discovered in what we ordinarily call 
individual persons. This does not mean, how- 
ever, that these elements are self-existent; 
for it is in the whole individual that they 
manifest their individual being. Similarly it 
is only in the wider personality revealed in 
social existence that the individual members 
of it manifest their true being. They have 
sprung from this wider personality, are born 
in it, and exist in it; and unless they 
realise this they do not realise what they 
are. Their wider personality is no ghost- 
like abstraction, but just the ordinary, but 
infinitely wonderful, spiritual reality which 
we see and feel around us everywhere - in 
time as well as in space. 

From the standpoint of personality the past 
and future are not outside the present, nor 
the parts outside one another in space: yet 
the meaning of personality is only realised 


Bei 


PERSONALITY AND IMPERFECTION 133 


and expressed in space and time relations. 
However wide the conception of personality 
may be there is always a fleeting ‘here and 


now’ in which it appears to be centred, 


although from its very nature it cannot be so 
centred, since time and space are within it. 
With the here and now there is always the 
appearance of indefiniteness, imperfection and 
ignorance. We may see that the universe 
can only be the manifestation of timeless 
personality : yet we cannot see in detail how 
this is so. It appears to us as full of mystery, 
imperfection, suffering, and endless contin- 
gency; and yet over and through all these 
appearances personality enfolds within itself 
time, space, and all apparent contingency and 
imperfection. 

Wecan find a clue to this mystery if we look 
back at the distinction between mechanism 
and life, and consider how the conception of 
life is related to that of mechanism. It is only 
in the failure of mechanical conception that 
we reach the biological conception. But in 
this failure the mechanical aspect of Nature 
does not disappear. If it did there would be 
no meaning in the biological aspect. If in 

12 


134 PERSONALITY 


respiration oxygen did not appear to us, and 
continue to appear, physically and chemically 
as what we call oxygen, and the structures — 
involved in respiration did not appear to us as 
physical structures, we could form no con- 
ception of respiration and the structures 
involved in it as being manifestations of life. 
It is true that when the phenomena are looked 
at as a whole we see life; but life only mani- 
fests itself through control of what appears as 
physical and chemical disorder—through the 
appearance of constant active struggle. An 
ideal otiose life, in which everything went 
rightly without effort, would not be life at 
all. There could be no life without the 
appearance of mechanism, just as there could 
be no whole without the appearance of self- 
existent parts. Biology implies physics and 
chemistry, and grows in meaning and richness 
with their growth, although, as we have seen, 
it cannot be reduced to physics and chemistry. 
This would still be so if we could see the way 
to extend biological conceptions to the whole 
of the so-called inorganic world. Physics and 
chemistry would still exist as indispensable 
abstract sciences. 


NATURE AND GOD 135 


The truth, therefore, is that the lower and 
more abstract aspects of reality are implied in 
the higher aspects, and do not disappear in 
them though constantly disappearing. Both 
lower and higher aspects are constantly growing 
—constantly being born afresh. The concep- 
tion of mere life, with its existence in time, is 
constantly disappearing in that of personality, 
but never disappears. A perfect universe of 
personality, with no imperfection and suffering, 
no here and now, no progressive science, no 
progressive ordering, in thought and deed, of 
the past, present and future, would not be an 
actual world. To use a mode of expression 
employed by Professor Pringle Pattison in 
his recently published Gifford Lectures, the 
lower aspects are ‘ organic’ to personality. 

Through analysis of what experience 
involves we are led up to the conception of 
the Universe as personality. In our relations 
to fellow-men, fellow-animals, and Nature as 
a whole, we find that this personality is not 
that of an individual man, but that all- 
embracing personality which we call God. 
This conclusion can be drawn, though less 
directly, from the mere study of Nature: for 


136 PERSONALITY 


not only is such knowledge of Nature as we 
possess the expression of human personality, 
but we are the children of Nature. This 
means, not that we are mere matter or mere 
living organisms, but that Nature, too, since 
we are of her, must be of personality. This 
is the real outcome of a thoroughgoing applica- 
tion of the doctrine of evolution. So far as 
our present direct scientific knowledge goes, 
the development of higher from lower forms 
of life appears as the outcome of chance con- 
ditions of environment acting on chance 
variations among organisms. But what lies 
hidden behind the words ‘ chance’ and ‘ varia- 
tion’? In conscious activity the variations 
which represent the progress of civilisation, or 
of education in the individual, are not the 
outcome of blind chance, but are expressions 
of personality to which both future and past 
are present, however imperfectly. We have 
thus no right to attribute to chance the varia- 
tions which occur in lower organisms in which’ 
we cannot yet trace directly the evidences of 
consciousness. Nor have we any right to 
attribute to chance that which we describe as 
the physical and chemical constitution of the 


MCU, PR 
a 


SUMMARY OF BOOK 137 


inorganic world. That something more than 
chance determines this has recently been 
pointed out by Professor L. J. Henderson in 
his books The Fitness of the Environment, and 
The Order of Nature. 

Since personality embraces all experience 
there is nothing outside it. In one sense, 
therefore, personality is always complete. In 
another sense, however, it is always incom- 
plete, since it is only through the constant 
negation of mere appearance that personality 
realises itself. Hence mere appearance is 
always present and constantly rising up with- 
in us as the here and now, the uncertainty, 
obscurity, imperfection, sin, and sorrow of the 
world. The distinctive note of Christianity 
is that God is present in this imperfect world, 
and that through the sin and suffering, and 
the constant negation of it, oneness with God 
is reached. This is the Gospel which Jesus 
and his followers preached. 

Let us now look back at the course of the 
discussions running through these lectures. 
The first lecture stated in outline the physico- 
chemical or mechanistic account of life. It 
is quite evident that this account, so far as it 


138 PERSONALITY 


goes, is of great practical value, since it 
enables us to predict much of what we observe 
in the behaviour of living organisms. It also 
seems at first sight to help us towards a 
general philosophy of what we call Nature. 

In the second lecture the mechanistic 
account of life was examined more closely, 
and its inadequacy pointed out. This inade- 
quacy is due to the fact that even by the 
widest stretch of imagination it is impossible 
to conceive of any mechanism capable of 
bringing about the phenomena, fundamentally 
characteristic for life, of organic maintenance 
and reproduction. The failure of the 
mechanistic account at this point is absolutely 
fatal to it, since the phenomena of mainten- 
ance and reproduction run through all organic 
activity. 

Failure in the possibility of a physico- 
chemical theory of life implies failure in 
the physico-chemical account of Nature. 
The facts of observation are, moreover, 
altogether against the theory that the failure 
is due to interference within the living body 
of some non-physical agency, such as the 
supposed ‘vital principle.’ As soon as we 


7 
* 


SUMMARY OF BOOK 139 


proceed to test this dualistic theory we find 
that the supposed interference depends wholly 
on what have been assumed to be physical and 
chemical conditions, although the outcome of 
these conditions is unintelligible from the 
standpoint of physics and chemistry. To 
understand the failure of the physico-chemical 
theory of life we must examine the whole 
physical and chemical interpretation of 
Nature. 

In the third lecture this examination was 
undertaken in the light of philosophical 
progress since Descartes first formulated 
generally the mechanistic account of Nature, 
including living organisms. The modern 
world has become so accustomed to the 
mechanistic interpretation of Nature that it 
- accepts this interpretation without question 
asa representation of reality, and admits with- 
out question the claim of those who call 
themselves ‘realists’ because they apply the 
mechanistic interpretation logically in every 
direction. But the claim was examined by 
Berkeley, Hume, and other eighteenth-century 
philosophers, and found to be baseless in 
spite of all the practical utility of physics and 


140 PERSONALITY 


chemistry. The physical world is only a 
human interpretation of reality, and an inter- 
pretation which is, in ultimate analysis, not 
consistent with itself. Men still go comfort- 
ably along, with Dr. Johnson, in the old 
beliefs about ‘ physical reality’; but that does 
not concern the present discussion. Physical 
reality represents only a working hypothesis 
of limited practical application. We are 
therefore quite free to apply to the phenomena 
_ of life a more adequate working hypothesis. 
We find this more adequate hypothesis 
already in practical use, but not clearly 
formulated, and, moreover, still confused by 
the intrusions of the mechanistic hypothesis. 
In the light of this more adequate hypothesis 
the parts and activities which we discern in 
a living organism and its biological environ- 
ment can be understood only as manifesta- 
tions of a whole which is the lite of the 
organism, and which expresses itself in 
activity. The parts and their spatial arrange- 
ments, including environment, are the expres- 
sion of active and unceasing maintenance, 
nutrition, or metabolism; and the activities 
are activities which express themselves in this 


SUMMARY OF BOOK 141 


maintenance. Reproduction is only a phase 
of that constant insensible reproduction which 
is ordinarily called nutrition. If we examine 
any living activity closely we find that we 
cannot define its nature apart from its relation, 
including spatial relation, to other associated 


_ activities. The respiratory activity of the 


tissues, for instance, is not something apart 
from nutritional, secretory, or muscular 
activity, but only one side of them; and the 
structures or spatial arrangements involved 


in respiratory activity are not something apart 


from their activity, but an expression of 
respiratory and other activity. If, for instance, 
we forcibly prevent respiratory activity the 
structures go to ruin. We can see at once 
that this is so if we look closely at living 
structure. The blood is part of the living 
structure of the body, and at different parts 
of the body the structure or composition of 
the blood present locally is different. The 
blood leaving the heart, or kidneys, or liver, 
or muscles, or brain, is not the same in com- 
position, but each variety is ‘normal’ for its 
particular place, and is kept normal by 
constant activity, just as is the rest of the 


142 PERSONALITY 


‘structure’ of these organs. The normality 
depends on regulation of flow in such a 
manner that normality is maintained. Thus 
the structure is the expression of activity, and 
this is so also for all the apparently solid 
structures of the living body, for the air in 
the lungs and the food-material in the 
alimentary canal, and for the external environ- 
ment in so far as it participates in life. The 
structures or spatial arrangements and 
activities maintain themselves as a whole, 
and together constitute the whole which we 
call life. They cannot be understood as the 
separate parts and activities of a machine can 
be understood ; and the spatial arrangements 
of the parts, including environment, cannot 
be understood as those of a mechanical system. 
Life does not exist as something localised in 
space. Spatial relations are within it, as an 
expression of it. In presence of what we 
recognise as life we apply, and must apply, a 
special mode of interpretation differing com- 
pletely from the physical interpretation which 
seems to suffice in the case of inorganic 
phenomena. The difference between organic 
and inorganic is for us a logical difference; 


SUMMARY OF BOOK 143 


but we find as an experimental fact the logic 
of life before us when we study life, just as 

_we have found up till now that the logic of 
mechanism is sufficient for the occasion when 
we study what we distinguish as inorganic 
Nature. It is Nature we study when we 
study life, as Hippocrates first pointed out, 
- just as it is Nature we are studying in physics 
and chemistry. We cannot resolve life into 
mechanism; but behind what we at present 
interpret as physical and chemical mechanism 
life may be hidden for all we yet know. This 
is an open scientific question ; but the question 
whether life may not some day be resolved 
into physico-chemical mechanism is not an 
open question. No possible meaning can be 
attached to such an expression as ‘the 
mechanism of life.’ 

When we see that the distinctive conception 
of life is the foundation of biology we also see 
that biology is an independent and progressive 
experimental science advancing confidently 
like the physical sciences, and with a pedigree 
as good as theirs. If, on the other hand, the 
view which has been popularised by so many 
physiologists in recent times were correct, that 


‘ 


144 ~ PERSONALITY 


life is only physical and chemical mechanism, 
we could not say with any confidence that 
biology is progressing; for with every ex- 
perimental advance we seem to be further 
from a _ physico-chemical conception of 
life. 

In the present lecture conscious life, or 
personality, has been considered. An organism 
considered as a mere organism responds 
‘blindly’ to the happenings in itself and its 
environment. For it they are mere happenings 
which it meets by blind efforts at maintenance 
and reproduction of its life. These happenings 
have no ‘meaning’ for it, so it does not learn 
from experience, and the happenings are just 
events arranged outside one another in time 
like the happenings to inorganic bodies. For 
personality, however, not only is the present, 
but also the past and the future, given in each 
happening. In perception we are aware of 
the past and future as well as the present; and 
voluntary action is action with both the past 
and the future in view, as well as the present. 
Kven the simplest sensation carries within it 
a past and future; and more complex per- 
ceptions carry within them explicitly a past 


SUMMARY OF BOOK 145 


and future arranged in time and space and 
connected together by the logical principles 
through which our experience is constituted 
and bound together. Time, as well as space, 
are within personality. Both past and future 
shape themselves in the present. Personality 
does not exist in time, like mere life, and also 
does not exist in space any more than life 
does. The surrounding physical, chemical, 
and biological world is within personality : for 
the world is just the world of perception as 
Hume and Kant taught, or the world moulded 
and fashioned in thought and deed during 
- progressive human development, as history 
and anthropology teach us. 

When we examine personality more closely 
we find that just as the life of an organism is 
-no mere individual life, but continuous with- 
out break from generation to generation, so 
personality is no mere individual personality 
among other personalities. We feel in, see 
in, exist in, that supreme Personality whom 
we call God, whose existence we recognise 
in the recognition of duty to our fellow- 
men and fellow-animals, present, past, and 
future: also to a truth which transcends 

K 


146 PERSONALITY 


practical truth for our individual selves, or 
for our generation. . 

We find also that personality manifests itself 
only in constant activity—in constant seeking 
for and acting on duty and truth. It is only 
so that we realise one-ness with God. The 
here and now, the imperfection, suffering, and 
sin of the world are not something outside of 
and indifferent to God. As the New Testa- 
ment teaches, God is in this world, here 
within and around us, amid the ignorance, 
sin and suffering, and not apart. 

We can now reach clear ideas as to the 
relations between time, space, mechanism, 
life, and personality. It is evident that the 
relation is a logical one, and depends upon 
different degrees of adequacy to reality in our 
conceptions of phenomena. 

We may regard a man as simply a unit 
outside other units in time, as, for instance, 
in the counting of men in a division-lobby of 
the House of Commons. We may also regard 
aman. as a mere extended patch of colour, or 
as occupying so much space. ‘The artist who 
is arranging a picture, the soldier using khaki 
as camouflage, or the architect designing a 


SUMMARY OF BOOK 147 


suitable lift, regards him for the moment in 
the light of one or other of these very abstract 
conceptions. 

We can also regard the man as about 
seventy kilogrammes of material with a certain 
external and internal configuration, and in 
more or less constant movement: such material 
consisting of a great variety of chemical mole- 
cules, acting upon one another and passing 
inwards and outwards in various ways. ‘This 
is a much less abstract conception of the man, 
and for many immediate purposes is sufficient 
or more than sufficient. It is the account 
which the mechanistic theory of life aims at 
giving in a complete form. 

We can next regard the man as alive—as 
an expression of blind maintenance of organic 
structure, activity and environment, con- 
tinuous from generation to generation. This 
is the point of view of biology, freed from the 
abstractions of the mechanistic standpoint. 
This mode of regarding the man takes into 
account a great deal of what was entirely left 
out of account in the physical and chemical 
view of him. The biological account is 
evidently of enormous practical use, for 


148 PERSONALITY 


instance in relation to medicine, agriculture, 
and social or economic efficiency. 

Lastly we can regard the man as the expres- 
sion of personality—of a reality which includes 
within itself the time and space around him 
and all that is within them. This reality 
manifests itself in his aspirations to see and 
do his duty—to discover the truth and make 
it prevail; and it is this reality which great 
teachers, poets, and artists are constantly 
revealing. As the expression of personality 
which is no mere individual personality, but 
enfolds experience, the man includes all that 
was left out in the previous pictures of him. 
He is thus no longer an abstraction from 
reality, like the man as a mere unit or form, 
or an arrangement of material parts, or a 
living organism, or a mere individual. He is 
now the real man, and his relations to the man 
as a material object, or as a living organism, 
is the relation of reality to an abstract and 
imperfect ideal presentation of it. Philosophy 
shows us that much of what, like the material 
man, is often taken for reality is only an 
insufficient ideal presentation of it. The 
materialists rather than the philosophers are 


A 


SUMMARY OF BOOK 149 


those who mistake ideal constructions for 
truth, though Descartes made this mistake 
when he took clearness of theoretical repre- 
sentation as a criterion of truth. 

Philosophy warns us against the mistake of 
supposing that a man is anything different 
from his organism perceived and understood 
more fully. It is absolutely vain to attempt 
to separate in any but a logical sense the 
personality of the man from his organic life 
or his physical and chemical mechanism. His 
character is, on a lower plane of perception, 
organic character: his passions on this plane 
are mere organic activities and instincts. To 
separate off the man’s organic nature as if 
everything belonging to it were outside his 
spiritual existence is to make the same sort of 
mistake as is made by the vitalists in biology. 
The love between parent and child, or between 
man and woman, may be looked upon, by 
those who are not attempting to see further 
into reality, as mere organic instinct. In 
nothing else, however, does personality in its 
distinctive sense manifest itself more clearly, 
and through nothing else can character be 
judged more certainly. 


150 PERSONALITY 


Philosophy also warns us against mistaking 
the ideal physical interpretation of the univere 
for its reality. The astronomer seems at first 
sight to be presenting to us a gigantic and 
absolutely inhuman universe, in which man 
and human activity are but tiny specks in 
infinite space and time. The experimental 
physicist, on the other hand, seems to show us 
that we and our activities are only a fleeting 
appearance due to the equally inhuman whirl- 
ing and clashing of myriads of electrons. 

These are mere ideal interpretations, 
recognised as such by the great philosophers 
of the eighteenth century, but serving, never- 
theless, to remind us, that man as a mere 
individual, or as a collection of them, is also 
a mere ideal interpretation. ‘As for man his 
days are as grass: as a flower of the field so 
he flourisheth. For the wind passeth over it 
and it is gone; and the place thereof shall 
know it no more.’ 

The main object of these lectures was to 
define the concepts and aims of biology, and 
distinguish them clearly from the concepts 
and aims of other sciences: also to justify the 
claim of biology to rank as no mere branch of 


SUMMARY OF BOOK 151 


physics and chemistry but as an independent 
science of the utmost practical importance 
and of great philosophical significance. 

Apart from philosophy, which looks. at 
experience as a whole, we can never reach 
clearness about the knowledge dealt with in 
individual sciences; and this is why so much 
philosophical discussion has entered into these 
lectures. Just as an ordinary workman ought 
to understand his tools, their dangers, and 
what can or cannot be done with them, so 
ought a man of science to understand those 
tremendously powerful and dangerous logical 
tools with which he does the work allotted to 
him. Nothing is more wide of the mark than 
the contention that philosophy is not needed 
in scientific work. The inevitable result for 
men of science who ignore the history and 
results of philosophy is that they are far more 
apt to fall victims to all sorts of misunder- 
standing, and even to gross superstition. They 
are also apt not to see great scientific questions 
which are waiting for experimental investiga- 
tion ; and they are in danger of spending time 
fruitlessly on investigation which can lead 
nowhere. Those who imagine that science 


mt 


152 PERSONALITY 


deals only with ‘ objective facts,’ independent 
of the observer and the ideas he has inherited, 
are the first to be misled. 

In science we are always dealing with partial 
and incomplete aspects of reality—with abstrac- 
tions which are not only convenient but 
ultimately unavoidable. Science is the applica- 
tion of abstract logical principles to a reality 
which they can never express fully. This is 
so not only in the mathematical, but also in 
the physical, biological, and any one of the 
humanistic sciences. It is the business of 
philosophy to point out and define these 
abstractions. Philosophy directs us, also, to 
that spiritual reality which is the only reality ; 
and from this point of view philosophy and 
religion are one. 


4 
ag 
rar 


\ 


Te 


SS 
ee 


Ry: 


% 
ae 


va 
Ss 
A 
: 
’ . 
= al 


os. 


») * 


{ b 
ae ae 


@ | LINGOLNEB|BLEARSTITYT 


: - il ini