i ' 


UNIV.. 
CAt.. 


SYMBOLIC  LOGIC. 


SYMBOLIC    LOGIC 


BY 


JOHN  VENN,  M.A., 

FELLOW,    AND   LECTURER    IN   THE   MORAL   SCIENCES, 
GONVILLE   AND    CAIUS    COLLEGE,    CAMBRIDGE. 


"Sunt  qui  mathematicum  vigorem  extra  ipsas  scientias,  quas  vulgo  mathematicas  appellamup, 
locum  habere  non  putant.  Sed  illi  ignorant,  idem  esse  mathematicc  scribere  quod  in  forma,  ut 
logici  vocant,  ratiocinari." 

LEIBNITZ,  De  vera  methodo  Philotophice  et  Theologite  (about  1690). 

"Cave  ne  tibi  imponant  mathematici  logici,  qui  splendidas  suas  figures  et  algebraicos 
maeandros  universale  inventionis  veri  medium  crepant." 

RUDIGEB,  De  tentu  veri  etfalti,  Lib.  II.  Cap.  IT.  §  xi.  (1722). 


MACMILLAN    AND    CO. 

1881 

[All  Rights  reserved.} 


Cambrt&ge : 

PRINTED    BY    C.     J.     CLAY,     M.A. 
AT    THE   UNIVERSITY   PRESS. 


TABLE    OF    CONTENTS. 

INTRODUCTION. 

Objections  to  the  introduction  of  mathematical  symbols  into  Logic.  Mutual 
relation  of  these  symbols.  The  Generalizations  of  the  Symbolic  Logic, 
and  their  relation  to  the  common  system.  Anticipations  of  Boole; 
especially  by  Lambert.  Biographical  notes  on  Lambert  and  Boole, 
pp.  ix. — xxxix. 

CHAPTER  I. 

On  the  forms  of  Propositions : — (1)  The  traditional  logical  forms ;  (2)  The 
exclusion  and  inclusion,  or  Hamiltonian  forms ;  (3)  The  compartmental, 
or  symbolic,  forms,  pp.  1 — 31. 

CHAPTER  II. 

Symbols  of  Classes.  Symbols  of  operations : — (1)  Aggregation  of  classes  to- 
gether ;  (2)  Exception  of  one  class  from  another ;  (3)  Restriction  of  one  class 
by  another.  Symbolic  representation  of  these  operations,  pp.  32 — 66. 

CHAPTER  III. 

The  inverse  operation  to  class  restriction.  Its  symbolization  by  the  sign  of 
Division.  Abstraction,  pp.  67 — 87. 

CHAPTER  IV. 

On  the  Choice  of  Symbolic  Language.  Reasons  for  selecting  that  of  Mathe- 
matics for  logical  purposes,  pp.  88 — 99. 

CHAPTER  V. 

Diagrammatic  Eepresentation.  Defects  of  the  familiar  Eulerian  scheme ;  and 
proposal  of  a  new  scheme,  better  fitted  to  represent  the  complicated  pro- 
positions of  the  Symbolic  Logic.  Logical  machines,  pp.  100 — 125. 


vi  Table  of  Contents. 

CHAPTER  VI. 

The  Import  of  Propositions,  as  regards  the  actual  existence  of  their  subjects 
and  predicates.  Such  existence  not  implied  in  the  Symbolic  Logic. 
Application  of  this  principle  to  (1)  the  incompatibility  of  propositions, 
(2)  their  independence,  pp.  126 — 153. 

CHAPTER  VII. 

Symbolic  expression  of  Ordinary  propositions.  Existential  explanation  of 
particular  propositions.  Quantification  of  the  Predicate,  pp.  154 — 179. 

CHAPTER  VIII. 
The  Universe  of  Discourse,  and  its  symbolic  representation,  pp.  180 — 189. 

CHAPTER  IX. 

On  Development  or  Expansion  ; — (1)  by  empirical  processes,  (2)  by  a  general- 
ized symbolic  process.  The  symbol  $  and  its  explanation,  pp.  190 — 221. 

CHAPTER  X. 

Logical  Statements  or  Equations ; — (1)  when  explicit,  (2)  when  implicit,  (3) 
when  involving  indefinite  class  factors,  pp.  222 — 239. 

CHAPTER  XI. 

Logical  Statements  or  Equations  (continued).  Groups  of  equations  (1)  affir- 
matively, (2)  negatively  translated.  The  interpretation  of  equations,  and 
the  so-called  Inductive  problem,  pp.  240 — 260. 

CHAPTER  XII. 
Miscellaneous  examples  in  illustration  of  the  foregoing  chapters,  pp.  261 — 284. 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

Elimination  in  Logic,  empirically  treated ;  (1)  from  propositions  in  their 
affirmative,  (2)  in  their  negative,  form.  pp.  285 — 295. 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

Elimination  by  a  general  symbolic  rule.  The  meaning  and  use  of  the 
expressions /(I)  and/(0)  in  Logic,  pp.  296—308. 

CHAPTER  XV. 

Completion  of  the  logical  problem,  by  the  determination  of  any  function  of 
our  class  terms  from  any  given  group  of  statements  or  equations;  (1) 
empirically,  (2)  by  a  general  symbolic  rule.  The  Syllogism  and  its  Sym- 
bolic treatment,  pp.  309 — 325. 


Table  of  Contents.  vii 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

Hypothetical  propositions ;  their  real  significance  and  their  symbolic  expres- 
sion. Primary  and  secondary  propositions,  pp.  326 — 349. 

CHAPTER  XVII. 

Generalizations  of  the  Common  Logic ; — Classes,  contradictory  and  contrary. 
Propositions,  their  conversion  and  oppbsition,  and  the  schedule  of  their 
various  forms.  Elimination.  Eeasonings.  pp.  350 — 362. 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 

Class  symbols  as  denoting  propositions.  The  modifications  of  interpretation 
demanded  on  this  view,  pp.  363 — 379. 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

Variations  in  Symbolic  Procedure  ;  (1)  The  exclusive  and  non-exclusive  plana 
of  expressing  alternatives,  (2)  The  intensive  and  extensive  interpretations 
of  our  terms,  (3)  The  consequences  of  extending  our  logical  rules  so  as  to 
embrace  the  Logic  of  Eelatives,  pp.  380 — 404. 

CHAPTER  XX. 

Historic  Notes ; — (1)  On  the  different  schemes  of  symbolic  notation,  as 
exhibited  in  the  expression  of  the  Universal  Negative  proposition ;  (2) 
On  the  different  schemes  of  geometrical  or  diagrammatical  representation 
of  propositions,  pp.  405 — 438. 

INDEX  of  Subject-matter,  and  of  Bibliographical  References,    pp.  439 — 446. 


PEEFACE. 


I  HAVE  so  fully  explained  the  nature  and  aim  of  this  system 
of  Logic,  in  the  Introduction,  that  nothing  further  need  be 
said  on  this  head.  The  substance  of  most  of  these  chapters  has 
been  given  in  my  college  lectures,  our  present  intercollegiate 
scheme  of  lecturing  (now  in  operation  for  about  twelve  years) 
offering  great  facilities  for  the  prosecution  of  any  special 
studies  which  happen  to  suit  the  taste  and  capacity  of  some 
particular  lecturer  and  a  selection  of  the  students.  I  mention 
this  in  order  to  explain  what  might  seem  a  disproportionate 
devotion  of  time  to  one  peculiar  development  of  Logic. 

Besides  Mr  C.  J.  Monro,  who  has  repeated  the  kind 
help  he  gave  on  a  former  occasion,  I  have  to  thank  several 
friends  and  fellow-lecturers  (amongst  whom  I  must  mention 
Mr  H.  Sidgwick,  Mr  H.  S.  Foxwell,  Mr  J.  Ward,  and  Mr 
J.  N.  Keynes,  before  whom  several  of  these  chapters  were 
read  and  discussed)  for  many  valuable  suggestions  and  criti- 
cisms. I  must  also  express  my  obligations  to  Prof.  G.  Groom 
Robertson,  of  University  College,  London,  for  his  kindness  in 
procuring  me  several  rare  works  from  the  valuable  library  of 
nis  college. 

I  should  add  here  that  the  substance  of  some  of  the 
following  chapters  has  already  appeared  elsewhere :  viz. 
Chap.  I  in  Mind  (July,  1880),  Chap,  v  in  the  Philosophical 
Magazine  (July,  1880),  and  Chap,  xx  in  the  Proc.  of  the 
Cambridge  Philosophical  Society  (Dec.,  1880),  but  all  of  these 
have  been  rewritten  and  enlarged.  The  general  view  adopted 
in  this  work  was  sketched  out  in  an  article  in  the  Princeton 
Review  of  September,  1880. 

CAMIIRIDOI, 

April  7,  IfWl. 


INTRODUCTION. 


THERE  is  so  certain  to  be  some  prejudice  on  the  part  of  those 
logicians  who  may  without  offence  be  designated  as  anti- 
mathematical,  against  any  work  professing  to  be  a  work  on 
Logic,  in  which  free  use  is  made  of  the  symbols  +  and  — , 
x  and  -•-,  (I  might  almost  say,  in  which  x  and  y  occur  in  place 
of  the  customary  X  and  Y,)  that  some  words  of  preliminary 
explanation  and  justification  seem  fairly  called  for.  Such 
persons  will  without  much  hesitation  pronounce  a  work 
which  makes  large  use  of  symbols  of  this  description  to  be 
mathematical  and  not  logical.  Though  such  an  objection 
betrays,  as  I  shall  hope  to  show,  some  ignorance  as  to  the 
nature  and  functions  of  mathematics1, — confounding  the  acci- 
dent of  expression  with  the  substance  of  meaning  and  appli- 
cation,— yet  there  is  certainly  a  fragment  of  truth  suggested 
by  it. 

This  truth  consists  in  what  may  be  described  as  being 
the  present  accidental  dependence  of  the  Symbolic  Logic 
upon  Mathematics.  Those  generalizations  to  which  Boole 

1  I  may  remark  that  by  '  mathe-  higher  branches  would  not  admit  the 

matics '  here  I  refer,  broadly  speaking,  exhaustiveness   of   this  description, 

to  questions  of  number,  magnitude,  but  it  will  well  include  all  that  can 

shape    and    position.     I    am    quite  be  meant  by  those  with  whom  I  am 

aware  that  some  exponents  of  the  arguing. 

V.  L.  b 


x  Introduction. 

was  the  first  to  direct  attention,  and  which  (as  will  be  fully 
explained  in  due  place)  are  purely  and  entirely  logical  in 
their  origin  and  nature,  are  yet  of  a  character  which  it  is 
very  difficult  for  any  one  to  grasp  who  has  not  acquired 
some  familiarity  with  mathematical  formulae.  It  should 
not  be  so,  and  I  hope  it  will  not  always  continue  to  be 
so,  but  at  present  it  can  hardly  be  otherwise.  This  state  of 
things  arises  from  the  fact  that  we  have  to  realise  a  certain 
generalized  use  of  symbols;  that  is,  to  take  account  of  an  exten- 
sion of  their  use  to  cases  distinct  from,  but  analogous  to,  that 
with  reference  to  which  they  first  had  their  meanings  assigned. 
In  such  extension,  it  must  be  understood,  we  have  to  anticipate 
not  only  a  merely  wider  range  of  application,  but  also  a  con- 
siderable transfer  of  actual  signification.  This  deliberate  and 
intentional  transfer  of  signification  to  analogous  cases,  as 
it  happens,  is  perfectly  familiar  to  the  mathematician,  but 
very  little  recognized  or  understood  in  other  departments  of 
thought.  Hence  it  comes  about  that  when  people  meet  with 
such  an  expression  as  x  +  y  in  a  work  which  is  professedly 
logical,  they  are  apt  to  say  to  themselves,  '  This  is  a  mathe- 
matical symbol :  the  author  is  diverging  into  mathematics, 
or  at  least  borrowing  something  from  that  science.'  If  they 
were  to  explain  themselves  they  would  probably  maintain 
that  the  sign  (-f)  stands  for  addition  in  mathematics,  and 
therefore  should  not  be  resorted  to  when  we  have  no  idea  of 
adding  things  together1. 

1  Presumably  this  is  Prof.  Spal-  needed,  and  none  is  sufficient,  for 

ding's  feeling  when  he  says:  "All  the  actual  guidance  of  thought  when 

attempts  to  incorporate  into  the  uni-  its  objects  are   not  mathematical,'' 

versal  theory  of  Thought  a  special  (Logic,  1857,  p.  50.)    He  might  have 

and  systematic  development  of  rela-  set  his  mind  quite  at  rest  as  regards 

tioim  of  number  and  quantity  must  the  relations  of  number  and  quantity, 

be  protested  against.... No  cumbrous  We  have   no  more  intention  than 

Bchemo  of  exponential  notation  is  himself  of  introducing  these  relations 


Introduction. 


XI 


What  such  objectors  must  be  understood  to  mean,  or 
rather  what  they  ought  to  mean,  is  of  course  that  (+)  is  the 
sign  of  addition  in  Arithmetic,  and  of  nothing  else  there  ;  but 
they  should  not  confound  Arithmetic  with  the  whole  of 
mathematics.  Even  to  go  no  further  than  Algebra,  we  find 
that  (+)  has  already  extended  its  signification,  having  come 
to  include  ordinary  subtraction,  in  case  the  quantity  to  which 
it  is  prefixed  has  itself  a  negative  value.  Go  a  little  further 
and  we  find  that  the  same  sign  is  used  to  indicate  direction 
in  space  instead  of  merely  ordinaiy  addition.  For  instance, 
let  any  one  take  up  some  work  imbued  with  the  spirit  of 


into  our  treatment  of  propositions : — 
in  fact  decidedly  less  so,  inasmuch  as 
we  do  not  quantify  predicates.  'Ex- 
ponential notation '  is,  I  suppose,  here 
employed  as  a  vague  epithet  of  dis- 
like, but  it  is  ill  chosen  ;  for  whilst 
the  rejection  of  all  exponential  nota- 
tion is  the  formal  differentia  of  the 
true  logical  calculus  as  compared 
with  the  mathematical,  Mr  Spald- 
ing's  own  work  happens  to  be  the 
only  one  I  have  ever  seen  which  does 
introduce  exponents  into  Formal 
Logic.  He  writes  A*  and  I2  for  '  All 
X  is  all  y ' ,  and  '  Some  X  is  some  Y\ 
giving  as  the  merit  of  this  notation 
that  it  "intimates  a  relation  of  the 
two  forms  to  the  received  A  and  I; 
and  the  character  of  this  relation  is 
faintly  hinted  at  when  the  added 
forms  are  symbolized  as  higher  powers 
of  the  old  ones1'! 

It  is  curious  at  what  an  early  date 
the  pure  logicians  began  to  get  into 
this  scare  at  the  threatened  inroad  of 
mathematical  notation,  as  the  reader 


will  see  by  the  extract  which  I  have 
given  from  Kiidiger  on  the  title  page. 
Any  modern  protester  against  Boole 
might  quote  his  very  words.  But 
who  these  mathematical  logicians 
are  I  have  not  yet  succeeded  in  deter- 
mining. The  two  editions  of  the 
work  published  in  the  author's  life- 
time appeared  in  1709  and  1723. 
I  know  of  nothing  answering  to  such 
a  description,  so  early  as  this,  except 
a  few  letters  and  other  short  papers 
by  Leibnitz  (most  of  which  cannot 
be  said  to  have  been  published),  and 
one  by  James  Bernoulli.  The  only 
authors  whom  he  mentions  in  this 
context  are,  I  think,  Descartes,  Spi- 
noza and  Tschirnhausen.  The  refe- 
rence to  the  two  former  suggests 
that  what  he  had  in  view  was  the 
employment  of  the  so-called  '  mathe- 
matical method,'  e.g.  starting  with 
definitions  and  so  on,  rather  than  an 
actual  employment  of  mathematical 
notation.  Prof.  Adamson  confirms 
me  in  this  opinion. 

6—2 


xii  Introduction. 

modern  analysis  (Clerk  Maxwell's  Elementary  treatise  on 
Matter  and  Motion  will  answer  the  purpose),  and  he  will 
perceive  that  A  +  B  has  come  to  indicate  a  certain  change 
both  of  magnitude  and  direction.  Similarly  with  other  suc- 
cessive transfers  of  signification.  The  full  application  of  this 
principle  to  Logic  must  be  reserved  for  discussion  in  future 
chapters.  At  present  it  will  be  enough  to  remark  that 
before  any  one  assumes  what  he  considers  to  be  a  mathemati- 
cal signification  on  the  part  of  these  symbols  (+,  — ,  x,  -r)  he 
should  endeavour  to  ascertain  with  some  degree  of  adequacy 
what  range  of  interpretation  they  already  possess  within  that 
science. 

But  it  is  here  that  the  difficulty  already  alluded  to  makes 
itself  felt,  owing  to  which  some  acquaintance  with  mathematics 
becomes  what  I  have  called  an  accidental  or  practical  neces- 
sity. We  propose  to  carry  out,  in  Symbolic  Logic,  a  precisely 
similar  extension  of  signification  of  symbols  to  that  just  men- 
tioned in  mathematics.  Such  an  extension  as  this  might 
conceivably,  no  doubt,  be  thoroughly  attained  within  the 
province  of  Logic  alone,  for  none  but  logical  conceptions  and 
processes  will  need  to  be  appealed  to.  And  when  these 
developments  of  the  subject  are  more  generally  known,  and 
more  fully  worked  out,  they  probably  will  be  so  attained. 
There  is  indeed  no  reason,  in  the  nature  of  things,  why  the 
logical  calculus  should  not  have  been  developed  to  its  present 
extent  before  that  of  mathematics  had  made  any  start  at  all. 
The  Greeks,  for  instance,  had  almost  nothing  which  we 
should  term  symbolic  language  in  use  for  their  arithmetic  or 
geometry,  but  there  was  no  actual  obstacle  to  their  inventing 
for  their  own  logical  purposes  .ill  those  symbols  which  Boole 
and  others  before  him  borrowed  from  the  sister  science.  Had 
this  been  so  there  might  in  time  have  been  corresponding 
protest*,  on  the  part  of  the  mathematicians,  against  the  ex- 


Introduction.  xiii 

tension  of  these  symbols  to  do  duty  in  the  new  department, 
on  the  ground  that  they  were  an  introduction  of  '  relations 
which  are  not  of  number  or  quantity.' 

At  the  present  time  discussions  of  this  particular  kind, — 
that  is,  having  reference  to  symbolic  language  in  general,  or 
to  that  of  Logic  and  not  Mathematics, — are  hardly  to  be 
found  anywhere.  Boole's  work  of  course  implies  much 
thought  in  this  direction,  but  there  is  very  little  in  the  way 
of  direct  explanation  offered  by  him  ;  as  is  evidenced  by  the 
mere  fact  that  he  attempts  no  explanation  whatever  of  his 
use  of  the  sign  of  division  in  Logic.  In  fact  the  student 
must  consult  the  works  of  some  of  the  more  philosophical 
mathematicians1  in  order  to  find  what  he  wants;  though 
naturally  their  discussions  are  so  much  confined  to  their  own 
wants  and  aims,  and  often  presuppose  such  an  acquaintance 
with  their  own  subject,  that  much  of  the  value  of  what  they 
say  is  lost  to  ordinary  lay-readers. 

This  explanation  of  the  principles  of  the  logical  calculus, 
in  entire  independence  of  those  of  the  mathematical  calculus, 
is  one  of  the  main  objects  which  I  have  had  before  me  in 
writing  this  book.  Every  criticism  and  explanation  offered 
here  is  to  be  regarded  as  standing  on  a  purely  logical  basis, 

1    There  is    probably  no    better  Arithmetik    und    Algebra,    Hankel's 

book  in  English,  for  this  purpose,  Vorlesungen  uber  die  Complexen  Zah- 

than  De  Morgan's  Trigonometry  and  len,  and  Lipschitz's  Grundlagen  der 

Double  Algebra,  which  is   however  Analysis. 

unfortunately  out  of  print.  Useful  The  first  of  these  discusses  very 
suggestions  will  also  be  found  in  the  fully  the  nature  of  the  elementary 
easier  introductory  parts  of  such  a  direct  and  inverse  operations  of 
work  on  Quaternions  as  that  of  Kel-  Arithmetic,  the  others  (I  speak  from 
land  and  Tait.  Of  course  both  of  a  very  slight  acquaintance)  are  of  too 
these  demand  some  familiarity  with  advanced  a  character  to  be  readily  in- 
more  than  merely  elementary  mathe-  telligible  to  those  who  do  not  bring 
matics.  There  are  several  valuable  some  corresponding  knowledge  with 
works  in  German :  e.g.  Schroder's  them. 


xiv  Introduction. 

and  therefore  as  being  on  all  essential  grounds  well  within 
the  judgment  and  appreciation  of  any  ordinary  logician. 
I  say  '  essential  grounds '  in  consequence  of  the  accidental 
impediments  above  mentioned.  It  is  at  the  present  time 
almost  impossible  to  find  any  good  discussion  of  the  nature 
of  symbolic  language  in  general  except  in  the  works  of  a  few 
mathematicians,  therefore  there  can  be  no  disguising  the 
fact  that  those  who  come  here  without  some  acquaintance 
with  that  science  will  stand  at  a  certain  disadvantage. 

There  can  surely  be  no  doubt  as  to  the  desirability  of 
thus  opening  out  a  second  means  of  acquiring  an  intelligent 
command  of  the  principles  of  a  really  general  symbolic 
language.  Taking  the  most  earnest  anti-mathematician's 
own  view  as  to  the  probable  origin  of  the  existent  symbols 
cannot  they  sympathise  with  Wesley's  resolve  that  the  good 
tunes  should  not  all  remain  in  bad  hands1?  There  is  no 
vested  right  in  the  use  of  4-  and  — ,  and  it  is  therefore  as 
open  to  them  as  to  any  one  else  to  express  themselves  by  aid 
of  these  symbols.  So  far  as  one  can  judge  by  the  present 
course  of  the  more  abstract  sciences,  whether  physical  or 
mathematical,  the  value  of  symbolic  language,  in  respect  of 
the  possibility  of  eliciting  new  and  unexpected  meanings  out  of 
old  and  familiar  forms,  is  likely  to  be  continually  more  appre- 
ciated. It  will  be  a  real  gain  to  the  cause  of  philosophy  if  some 
alternative  branch  of  knowledge  can  be  found  which  will  afford 
a  field  for  acquiring  and  realising  such  conceptions  as  this. 

The  relation  of  these  languages  of  Logic  and  of  Mathe- 
matics to  one  another  as  mere  languages,  signification  apart ; 
the  extent  to  which  they  can  be  considered  to  be  one  and  the 

1  There  are  reasons  for  supposing,  by  them  from  the  practice  of  the 

according  to  De  Morgan,  that  these  counting    house    (Camb.    Phil.    Tr. 

signs  +  and  —  were  not  invented  by  No.  xi.    "On  the  early  history  of  the 

the   mathematicians,   but    borrowed  signs  +  and  -  in  mathematics"). 


Introduction.  xv 

same  tongue ;  and  the  respects  in  which  they  differ  from  one 
another,  may  be  familiarly  illustrated  as  follows. 

Suppose  that  any  one  came  into  a  lecture  room  and  saw 
the  expression  A  +  B  written  on  the  board  :  Could  he  infer 
the  subject  of  the  lecture,  or  the  meaning  of  the  signs  ? 
Certainly  not:  but  of  one  thing  he  may  feel  confident, 
viz.  that,  whichever  of  the  various  admissible  meanings 
it  may  have  borne,  he  will  not  do  any  mischief  by 
transposing  A  and  S,  because  the  commutative  law  is 
tolerably  certain  to  be  accepted  by  any  person  who  wrote 
down  such  an  expression.  Now  let  him  be  told  that  the 
lecture  was  one  on  Logic,  and  the  language  therefore  in 
which  the  symbols  were  written  was  logical.  He  may  go  a 
step  further,  by  putting  some  significance  into  the  signs. 
He  knows  that  A  and  B  stand  respectively  for  classes, 
and  that  +  aggregates  those  classes.  But  here  again  he  comes 
to  a  stop.  Though  he  knows  the  language  of  the  lecturer 
he  does  not  know  his  dialect,  so  to  say.  Was  it  the  exclusive 
or  the  non-exclusive  dialect  for  alternatives1?  If  the  former, 
he  can  infer  that  A  and  B  have  nothing  in  common ;  as 
otherwise  A  +  B  would  have  been  bad  grammar  for  'A  or  B' ; 
it  ought  then  to  have  stood  A  +  AB.  The  dialect  settled,  he 
is  of  course  still  in  entire  darkness  as  to  what  A  and  B  may 
mean.  He  cannot  even  know  that  they  are  classes  strictly  so 
called,  for  they  may  equally  stand  for  single  events.  For  such 
detailed  information,  he  must  apply  to  the  lecturer  himself,  or 
to  one  of  his  class ;  for  nothing  but  specific  information  can 
possibly  enable  him  to  infer  such  facts  as  these. 

But  suppose  on  the  other  hand,  that  he  were  told  that 
the  lecture  had  been  on  mathematics,  would  his  uncertainty 
be  more  completely  or  immediately  removed  ?  Certainly 
not.  It  is  true  that  there  are  not  here  what  I  have  just 

1  For  explanation  of  this  point,  see  Chap.  xix. 


xvi  Introduction. 

called  dialectic  varieties,  because  almost  all  who  use  the 
language  of  mathematics  upon  the  same  subject,  use  it 
according  to  precisely  the  same  laws;  that  is,  the  differences 
of  usage  depend  here  not  upon  the  speaker  but  upon 
his  subject.  But  the  nature  of  that  subject  would  make  all 
the  difference  in  the  interpretation  of  the  symbols.  Had 
the  lecture  been  on  Arithmetic,  he  would  know  that  A  and  B 
had  stood  generally  for  numbers,  or  specially  for  some 
number,  and  that  +  had  stood  for  simple  addition.  Had  it 
been  on  Statics,  he  would  reasonably  infer  that  A  and  B  had 
stood  for  forces,  and  had  indicated  both  their  magnitude  and 
their  direction,  and  that  +  had  stood  for  the  composition 
of  these  forces,  so  that  the  whole  expression  represented  the 
resultant  force.  But  then  again  he  would  come  to  a  stop. 
He  could  no  more  draw  lines  representing  those  forces, 
in  the  absence  of  information  as  to  the  scale  and  direction 
adopted  by  the  lecturer,  than  he  could  say,  without  corre- 
sponding information  from  the  logical  lecturer,  what  sort 
of  things  he  had  in  view  with  his  A  and  his  B. 

We  may  therefore  regard  Symbolic  Logic  and  Mathe- 
matics as  being  branches  of  one  language  of  symbols,  which 
possess  some,  though  very  few,  laws  of  combination  in  common. 
This  community  of  legislation  or  usage,  so  far  as  it  exists,  is 
our  main  justification  for  adopting  one  uniform  system 
of  symbols  for  both  alike.  The  older  branch, — that  of 
mathematics, — may  be  divided,  in  reference  to  its  mere  form, 
into  several  different  languages.  The  distinction  between 
these  depends  almost  entirely  upon  the  nature  of  the  subject 
matter.  There  is  a  language,  for  instance,  of  Algebra,  and 
one  of  Quaternions,  besides  others  which  have  been  proposed 
or  adopted.  These  differences  are  what  may  be  called 
scientific,  rather  than  dialectic.  Of  the  latter  there  is 
not  much  trace  in  mathematics;  in  other  words,  there 


Introduction.  xvii 

are  few,  if  any,  differences  of  symbolic  usage  depending 
not  upon  subject  matter  but  upon  the  custom  of  individual 
writers,  of  schools,  or  of  nations.  The  language  of  Logic  on 
the  other  hand  has  hardly  yet  begun  to  show  any  subdivision 
according  to  the  subject  matter  treated  of,  the  present 
diversity  of  usage  being  one  between  different  schools 
treating  of  one  and  the  same  subject.  Where  it  shows  signs 
of  such  differentiation  is  in  respect  of  the  Logic  of  Relatives. 
So  far  as  this  is  cultivated  we  certainly  demand  some  relaxa- 
tion, if  not  entire  rejection  of,  the  law  that  xx  =  x,  viz.  that 
repetition  of  class  attribution  does  not  alter  the  result.  Such 
a  change  as  this,  as  will  be  pointed  out  in  due  place,  is  of 
a  far  more  serious  character,  on  any  formal  or  systematic 
grounds,  than  the  most  extensive  transfer  of  mere  application 
of  the  rules  of  operation. 

It  ought  to  be  pointed  out  here  that  some  of  those 
who  maintain  that  this  system  of  Logic  is  to  be  called 
'mathematical'  labour  under  no  confusion  whatever  as  to 
the  real  nature  of  each  of  these  subjects.  With  them  it  is 
mainly  a  question  of  definition,  since  they  understand  by 
mathematics  any  such  language  of  pure  symbols  as  I  have 
above  described,  and  which  I  prefer  to  regard  as  a  genus 
which  includes  mathematics  as  one  of  its  species.  There  can 
be  little  doubt  that  this  was  Boole's  own  view,  for  I  think 
that  Mr  Harley  is  right  (Report  of  British  Association,  1866; 
see  also  the  Report  for  1870)  in  thinking  that  the  term 
mathematical  was  used  by  him  "in  an  enlarged  sense, 
as  denoting  the  science  of  the  laws  and  combinations  of 
symbols,  and  in  this  view  there  is  nothing  unphilo- 
sophical  in  regarding  Logic  as  a  branch  of  Mathematics 
instead  of  regarding  Mathematics  as  a  branch  of  Logic1". 

1  Boole  himself  has  said  the  same:       laws  of   Logic, — those   alone   upon 
"It  is  simply  a  fact  that  the  ultimate      which  it  is  possible  to  construct  a 


xviii  Introduction. 

The  extract  from  Leibnitz  which  I  have  placed  on  the 
title  page  is  couched  in  a  similar  spirit.  There  is  nothing 
erroneous  in  this  interpretation,  provided  we  clearly  under- 
stand that  the  principles  and  procedure  of  the  logical 
calculus  must  be  justified  in  entire  independence  of  any  other 
science.  When  however  we  have,  as  here,  two  cognate 
branches  of  abstract  science  of  almost  equal  antiquity, 
it  seems  to  me  to  be  likely  to  lead  to  misconception  it 
we  thus  stretch  the  name  of  one  of  them  so  as  to  cover 
the  other  also.  It  is  better  to  use  some  vaguer  general  name 
to  include  them  both. 

As  regards  the  utility  of  the  Symbolic  Logic,  the  defence 
is  sometimes  rested  almost  entirely  upon  the  great  increase 
of  power  which  it  affords  iu  the  solution  of  complicated 
problems.  I  should  be  perfectly  prepared  to  support  its 
claims  on  this  ground  alone,  even  were  there  nothing  else  to 
be  said  in  its  favour.  It  is  scarcely  conceivable  that  any  one 
who  has  been  in  the  habit  of  using  these  symbolic  methods 
should  doubt  that  they  enable  us  easily  to  thread  our  way 
through  intricacies  which  would  seriously  tax,  if  they  did  not 
completely  baffle,  the  resources  of  the  syllogism.  As  well 
might  one  endeavour  to  discard  the  help  of  Algebra  and 
persist  in  trying  to  work  out  cur  equations  by  the  aid  of 
Arithmetic  only.  But  then  it  must  be  admitted  that  these 
really  intricate  problems  are  seldom  forced  upon  us  in  any 
practical  way.  Regarded  as  means  to  an  end,  rather  than  as 
studies  ou  their  own  account,  Logic  and  Mathematics  stand 
on  a  very  different  footing  in  this  respect.  We  acquire  skill 
with  the  weapons  of  the  former  rather  with  a  view  to  our 
general  culture,  whereas  in  learning  to  use  the  latter  we  are 

science  of  Logic, — are  mathematical      quantity."      (Lecture    delivered    at 
in  their  form  and  expression,  though       Cork,  1851.) 
not  belonging  to  the  mathematics  of 


Introduction.  xix 

also  training  ourselves  for  perfectly  serious  intellectual  war- 
fare. Without  consummate  mathematical  skill,  on  the  part 
of  some  investigators  at  any  rate,  all  the  higher  physical 
problems  would  be  sealed  to  us;  and  without  competent  skill 
on  the  part  of  the  ordinary  student  no  idea  can  be  formed  of 
the  nature  and  cogency  of  the  evidence  on  which  they  rest. 
Mathematics  are  here  not  merely  a  gate  through  which  we 
may  approach  if  we  please,  but  they  are  the  only  mode 
of  approach  to  large  and  important  districts  of  thought. 

In  Logic  it  is  quite  otherwise.  It  may  almost  be  doubted 
whether  any  human  being,  provided  he  had  received  a  good 
general  education,  was  ever  seriously  baffled  in  any  problem, 
either  of  conduct  or  of  thought  (examinations  and  the  like  of 
course  excluded)  by  what  could  strictly  be  called  a  merely 
logical  difficulty.  It  is  not  implied  in  saying  this,  that 
there  are  not  myriads  of  fallacies  abroad  which  the  rules 
of  Logic  can  detect  and  disperse,  as  well  as  abundance  of 
fallacious  principles  and  methods  resorted  to,  which  logical 
training  can  gradually  counteract.  The  question  is  rather 
this : — Do  we  ever  fail  to  get  at  a  conclusion,  when  we  have 
the  data  perfectly  clearly  before  us,  not  from  prejudice  or 
oversight  but  from  sheer  inability  to  see  our  way  through 
a  train  of  merely  logical  reasoning  ?  The  mathematician  is 
only  too  well  acquainted  with  the  state  of  things  in  which  he 
has  got  all  the  requisite  data  clearly  before  him,  (the  problem 
being  fully  stated  by  means  of  equations),  and  yet  he  has 
to  admit  that  the  present  resources  of  his  science  are  quite 
inadequate  to  effect  a  solution.  It  is  almost  needless  to  say 
that  there  is  nothing  resembling  this  in  Logic ;  the  difficulties 
which  persistently  baffle  us  here,  when  we  really  take  pains 
to  understand  the  point  in  dispute,  being  philosophical  rather 
than  logical.  The  collection  of  our  data  may  be  tedious,  but 
the  steps  of  inference  from  them  are  mostly  very  simple. 


xx  Introduction. 

When  it  is  said  that  the  main  advantages  to  be  derived 
from  the  study  of  these  extensions  of  Logic  are  specu- 
lative rather  than  practical,  it  may  be  well  to  spend  a 
few  pages  in  illustrating  and  expanding  this  statement.  The 
general  intellectual  advantages  of  any  serious  mental  exercise 
may,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  be  taken  for  granted  here.  I  will 
therefore  start  with  the  assumption  that  the  ordinary  Logic 
has  some  use  in  it,  and  will  only  direct  attention  to  such 
special  advantages  as  the  logical  student  may  derive  from  our 
subject,  since  these  are  more  likely  to  be  overlooked. 

To  begin  with  :  the  mere  habit  and  capacity  of  generali- 
zation is  surely  worth  a  great  deal.  As  one  entire  chapter 
is  devoted  to  pointing  out  the  various  directions  in  which 
Symbolic  Logic  is  to  be  regarded  as  generalizing  the  pro- 
cesses of  the  ordinary  Logic,  a  few  indications  must  suffice 
here.  The  common  Syllogism  may  be  described  as  being  a 
solution  of  the  following  problem  : — '  Given  the  relations  in 
respect  of  extension  of  each  of  two  classes  to  a  third,  as 
conveyed  by  means  of  two  propositions,  find  the  relation  of 
the  two  former  to  one  another'.  Of  course  it  is  not  maintained 
that  this  is  the  only  account  to  be  given  of  the  syllogistic 
process,  or  even  the  most  natural  and  fundamental  one,  but 
it  is  certainly  one  account.  Well,  the  general  problem  of 
which  this  is  a  very  special  case,  may  be  stated  thus : — 
'Given  any  number  of  propositions,  of  any  kind,  categorical 
disjunctive  or  otherwise,  and  involving  any  number  of  terms, 
find  the  mutual  relation  to  one  another,  in  respect  of  their 
extension,  of  any  selection  from  amongst  all  these  terms  to 
any  other  such  selection '.  Again,  the  syllogism  is  a  case 
of  Elimination  as  well  as  of  inference;  that  is,  we  know 
that  we  thus  get  rid,  in  our  conclusion,  of  one  term  out  of  the 
three  involved  in  our  premises.  Here  the  corresponding 
general  problem  would  be  to  ascertain  whether  there  is  any 


Introduction.  xxi 

limit  to  the  number  of  terms  which  can  be  thus  eliminated 
from  one  proposition,  or  from  any  assigned  group  of  pro- 
positions; and  to  give  general  rules  for  such  a  process  of 
elimination. 

A  thorough  generalization  assumes  sometimes  an  entirely 
unfamiliar  aspect  to  those  who  were  previously  acquainted 
only  with  some  very  specialized  form  of  the  generalized  pro- 
cess : — thus  we  all  know  what  a  step  it  is  to  most  beginners 
to  extend  'weight'  into  'universal  gravitation.'  In  such 
cases  the  realization  of  the  generalization  may  amount  almost 
to  the  acquisition  of  a  new  conception,  rather  than  to  the 
mere  extension  of  one  with  which  we  were  already  intimate. 
For  instance,  there  is  an  inverse  process,  as  distinguished 
from  a  direct,  of  which  we  may  get  a  rudimentary  notion 
in  what  is  called  Accidental  Conversion.  Given  that  *  All 
X  is  Y',  what  is  known  about  Fin  relation  to  XI  Logic, 
as  we  know,  answers  at  once  that  '  Some  Y  is  X',  by  which  it 
may  be  seen  to  mean,  interpreting  the  statement  in  terms  of 
extension,  that  the  class  Y  certainly  includes  all  X  and  for 
aught  we  know  may  include  anything  besides.  Now  differently 
worded,  this  process  may  be  generalized  as  follows  : — Given 
the  relation  of  one  class  to  another,  find  the  relation  of  the 
second  to  the  first1.  The  relation  here  is  of  course  to  be 
confined  to  those  of  which  our  Logic  takes  cognisance,  but 

1  That  is,  Given  x=f(y),  we  ex-  eludes  any  general   solution   there. 

press  the  inverse  in  the  form  But,  as  will  be  found,  there  are  such 

y—f~l(x).  restrictions  and  simplifications  upon 

This  is,  so  far,  a  mere  expression  or  all  logical  functions  as  to  render  a 

definition  of  what  we  want,  and  not  general    solution    perfectly   feasible. 

at  all  a  solution  nor  even  a  declara-  It  may  be  remarked,  that  the  answer 

tion  that  there  is  a  solution.     What  is  an  indefinite  one,  as  is  mostly  the 

is    necessary  is   to    rationalize    the  case  with  inverse  solutions;  that  is, 

v  latter  expression.     The  wide  range  there  is  not  one  single  answer,  and 

which/  assumes  in  mathematics  pre-  only  one,  to  the  problem. 


XX11 


Introduction. 


the  classes  themselves,  it  must  be  remembered,  need   not 
be  of  the  simple  X  or  Y  type.     On  the  contrary  they  may 
be  composed  of  any  number  of  terms,  and  these  any  how 
combined  by  aggregation,  exception,  restriction  and  so  forth. 
When   the   process   of  Conversion    is    thus   regarded,   it  is 
seen  to  be  a  restricted  case  of  a  much  more  general  problem. 
The  generalizations  here  referred  to  are  but  one  or  two 
out  of  a  number  with  which  we  shall  have  to  occupy  our- 
selves.    What  reason  can  be  urged  why  those  who  are  able  to 
understand  Logic  thoroughly  in  its  common  form,  should  not 
also  go  on  to  study  it  in  this  extended  form  ?   Whatever 
objections  we  may  feel  to  doing  so  let  us  not  rest  them  on  the 
ground  that  these  discussions  are  no  part  of  Logic.     Say,  if 
we  like,  that  such  questions  are  so  simple  that  the  traditional 
methods  can  readily  grapple  with  them ;  say,  if  we  like,  that 
they  are   logically  insoluble ;  say,  if  we  like,  that  they  are 
frivolous  or  absurd,  (we  are  all  supposed  to  agree  that  the 
syllogism  is  useful),  but  do  not  let  us  maintain  that  they  are 
not  logical.     They  belong  to  that  science  by  a  double  right, 
both  positively  and  negatively.     Positively  they  belong  to 
Logic  because  they  are  simply  generalizations  of  processes 
of  which  Logic  is  universally  admitted  to  take  cognisance. 
Negatively  they  belong  to  it  because  they  certainly  do  not 
belong  to  Mathematics,  which  is  presumably  the  only  other 
abstract  science  to  which  they  are  likely  to  be   relegated. 
There  is  no  more  of  enumeration  or  valuation  of  any  kind  of 
unit  in  them,  than  there  is  in  the  syllogism.     They  can  be 
so  stated  as  to  involve  nothing  whatever  but  the  mutual 
relations  of  various  classes  or  class  terms  to  each  other  in.  the 
way  of  inclusion  and  exclusion,  of  existence  and   of  jhon- 
existence.     So  far  from  being  fairly  open  to  the  charge  of 
being  too  numerical,  we  are  really  more  open  to  that  of  being 
almost  prudishly  averse  to  being  seen  or  thought  to  enumerate, 


Introduction.  xxiii 

as  will  be  found  when  we  discuss  the  treatment  of  'particular' 
propositions. 

One  great  advantage  of  this  kind  of  study  is  to  be  sought 
even  within  the  sphere  of  ordinary  Logic,  in  the  increased 
clearness  of  view  and  philosophic  comprehension  which  results 
from  carrying  our  speculations  well  outside  that  sphere.  As 
De  Morgan  has  said,  "  Every  study  of  a  generalization  or 
extension  gives  additional  power  over  the  particular  form  by 
which  the  generalization  is  suggested.  Nobody  who  has  ever 
returned  to  quadratic  equations  after  the  study  of  equations 
of  all  degrees,  or  who  has  done  the  like,  will  deny  my  assertion 
that  ov  /3A,€7ret  /3\e7ra)v  may  be  predicated  of  every  one  who 
studies  a  branch  or  a  case,  without  afterwards  making  it  part 
of  a  larger  whole."  (Syllabus  p.  34.)  So  I  should  say  here 
that  the  student  will  understand  the  nature  of  the  simple 
logical  processes  in  a  better  way  when  he  has  investigated  the 
general  processes  of  which  they  are  particular  cases.  For 
instance,  as  I  shall  hope  to  show,  one  of  the  most  essential 
characteristics  of  logical  Elimination  is  loss  of  precision  and 
determination ;  but  this  is  a  characteristic  which  is  by  no 
means  obvious  in  the  ordinary  treatment. 

To  this  should  be  added  another  important  consideration. 
There  are  several  rather  perplexing  questions  in  Logic  in 
regard  to  which  it  does  not  seem  possible  to  appreciate  fully 
the  grounds  of  decision,  if  we  confine  ourselves  to  the  narrow 
field  afforded  by  the  ordinary  treatment.  I  may  offer,  as  an 
instance  in  point,  the  explanation  of  the  Import  of  Propo- 
sitions proposed  in  Chap.  VI.  The  view  there  propounded  : — 
viz.  that,  for  purely  logical  purposes,  the  only  unconditional 
implication  of  even  an  Affirmative  is  to  be  found  in  what  it 
denies ;  what  it  asserts  being  only  accepted  on  the  hypothesis 
that  there  are  things  existent  corresponding  to  the  subject 
and  predicate : — will  probably,  on  the  first  enunciation,  sound 


xxiv  Introduction. 

very  far-fetched  and  needless.  In  this  systematic  form  the 
interpretation  is,  I  believe,  novel ;  but  a  partial  form  of  it, 
viz.  the  hypothetic  interpretation  of  categoricals,  has  been 
frequently  proposed  and  debated.  Now  I  cannot  but  think 
that  the  very  inadequate  discussion  of  the  subject,  indeed  its 
almost  entire  rejection  from  all  English  manuals,  has  arisen 
from  the  fact  that  the  reasons  for  such  a  proposal  cannot 
possibly  be  estimated  within  the  boundaries  of  the  common 
treatment.  Within  those  boundaries  the  traditional  expla- 
nation, or  absence  of  one,  will  answer  in  a  somewhat  lame 
way ;  but  when  we  seek  for  some  account  which  shall  be 
really  general,  adapted  to  any  propositions  or  groups  of  pro- 
positions however  complicated,  we  seem  to  be  forced  towards 
the  explanation  in  question.  The  reader  will  find  another 
analogous  instance  to  this  in  our  treatment  of  the  word  'some', 
where  the  utter  inadequacy  of  the  Quantification  of  the 
Predicate  will  come  out  in  the  course  of  the  discussion. 

The  solution  of  difficulties  of  the  kind  in  question  is  often 
greatly  aided  by  the  careful  examination  of  extreme  or 
limiting  values  of  our  terms  and  operations.  Popular  feeling 
and  popular  thought,  as  a  rule,  object  strongly  to  the  recog- 
nition of  cases  of  this  description,  and  not  without  reason  on 
the  whole.  Far  the  larger  part  of  the  meaning  of  our  state- 
ments is  made  up  of  implications,  sometimes  remote  and 
subtle,  and  these  rest  upon  various  tacit  restrictions  as  to 
the  range  of  application  of  the  terms  in  question.  Hence 
our  meaning  would  often  be  seriously  disturbed  by  pushing 
on  to  an  extreme  case  *.  But  in  any  abstract  science  we  are 

1  The  mathematician  of  course  is  to  be  nothing  but  rather  feeble  at- 
perfectly  familiar  with  all  this;  but  tempts  at  a  joke.  Thus  the  state- 
to  the  popular  mind  even  extreme  ment  that  St  Helena  contains  a  large 
cases  (t  .«•.  such  as  fall  distinctly  with-  salt  lake  or  sea,  studded  with  islands, 
in  the  given  limits)  would  often  seem  might  call  for  some  explanation  as  to 


Introduction.  xxv 

bound  not  to  neglect  the  examination  of  such  cases,  since 
many  valuable  hints  may  be  gained  by  their  discussion  ;  and 
under  any  circumstances  every  scientific  statement  is  bound 
to  be  explicit  and  precise  as  to  its  limits.  Hence  I  have 
made  a  point  of  going  tolerably  fully  into  enquiries  of  this 
nature  wherever  they  have  happened  to  lie  near  our  path. 
I  have  been  the  more  prompted  to  do  so  owing  to  the  fact 
that  most  logicians  have  been  far  too  ready  to  acquiesce  in 
the  popular  prejudices  on  this  point,  instead  of  insisting  that 
their  own  scientific  language  should  be  adapted  to  every 
scientific  use. 

Some  of  the  remarks  hitherto  made  will  suggest  the 
question  whether  it  is  proposed  that  the  study  of  the  Sym- 
bolic Logic  should  supersede  that  of  the  traditional  Logic  as 
a  branch  of  education  ?  By  no  means.  No  one  can  feel 
more  strongly  than  I  do  the  merits  of  the  latter  as  an  educa- 
tional study.  And  this  conviction  is  even  enhanced  by  the 
fact  that  some  of  the  most  instructive  portions  of  the  common 
system  are  just  those  which  Symbolic  Logic  finds  it  necessary 
to  pass  by  almost  without  notice.  Amongst  these  may  be 
placed  the  distinction  between  Denotation  and  Connotation, 
the  doctrine  of  Definition,  and  the  rules  for  the  Conversion 
and  Opposition  of  propositions  from  the  common  point  of 
view.  Perfect  clearness  of  apprehension  on  all  these  points 
seems  essential  to  accuracy  of  thought,  and  it  is  difficult  to 
find  any  better  means  of  acquiring  this  clearness  than  the 
study  of  some  of  the  ordinary  logical  manuals.  Indeed  one 
merit  of  the  common  system  seems  to  me  to  lie  in  the  com- 
parative empiricism  and  restriction  of  its  point  of  view ;  for  it 

what  was .  meant.    And  yet,  unless  definition  could   be   laid   down   for 

we  insist  upon  some  limit  as  to  the  either  lake  or  island,  on  a  closed  sur- 

relative  extent  of  the  land  or  water  face  like  a  sphere,  which  should  not 

assignable  to  compose  an  island,  what  make  such  a  statement  strictly  true  ? 

V.  L.  C 


x-xvi 


Introduction. 


is  tins  which  enhances  its  educational  value  by  keeping  its 
rules  and  forms  of  expression  in  tolerably  close  harmony  with 
the  language  of  ordinary  life1.  It  is  often,  as  we  know,  diffi- 
cult to  say  what  is  a  grammatical  and  what  a  logical  question, 
owing  to  the  fact  that  the  forms  of  proposition  in  the  ordi- 
nary logic  are  just  those  of  common  life  with  the  least  degree 
of  modification  consistent  with  securing  accuracy  of  meaning. 
Common  Logic  should  in  fact  be  no  more  regarded  as  super- 
seded by  the  generalizations  of  the  Symbolic  System  than  is 
Euclid  by  those  of  Analytical  Geometry.  And  the  grounds  for 
retaining  in  each  case  the  more  elementary  study  seem  to  be 
identical.  The  narrower  system  has  its  peculiar  advantage, 
owing  to  the  fact  that,  being  by  comparison  more  concrete,  it 
is  easier  for  a  beginner  to  understand  ;  that  there  is  thus  less 


1  Some  philologists  have  recently 
directed  an  attack  against  the  whole 
science  of  Formal,  viz.  Aristotelian  or 
Scholastic  Logic,  on  the  ground  that 
it  is  so  largely  made  up  of  merely 
grammatical  necessities  or  conven- 
tions ;  nearly  all  its  rules  being  more 
or  less  determined  by  characteristics 
peculiar  to  the  Aryan  languages. 
Thus  Mr  Sweet  (Trans,  of  the  Philo- 
logical Society,  1876:  quoted  and 
endorsed  by  Mr  Sayce),  says  that 
as  a  consequence  of  philological  an- 
alysis" tin;  conversion  of  propositions, 
the  figures,  and  with  them  the  whole 
fabric  of  Formal  Logic  fall  to  the 
ground".  It  is  no  business  of  mine 
here  to  defend  the  old-fashioned 
Logic,  which  has  plenty  of  champions 
still,  BO  I  merely  remark  that  I  can- 
not think  its  case  BO  desperate  as 
this.  It  is  quite  true  (so  far  as  I  can 
judge)  that  its  dependence  upon  the 


accidents  of  speech  is  much  closer 
than  logicians  have  generally  admit- 
ted. This  would  be  a  serious  consi- 
deration if  we  maintained  that  the 
common  schedule  of  propositions  re- 
presents the  way  in  which  men  neces- 
sarily assert  and  reason,  instead  of 
(as  I  have  urged  in  the  following 
chapter)  merely  one  of  several  ways 
in  which  they  may  do  so.  For  my- 
self, I  regard  this  close  dependence  up- 
on popular  speech  as  being  rather  u 
merit  than  otherwise  for  educational 
purposes.  The  Symbolic  Logic  is  as 
nearly  free  from  all  such  accidents  of 
speech  as  anything  dealing  with  hu- 
man thought  well  can  be.  The  fact 
that  this  is  so,  constitutes  one  great 
reason  why  I  should  be  very  sorry 
(as  above  remarked)  to  see  the  com- 
mon Logic  superseded  by  a  moro 
scientific  rival. 


Introduction.  xxvii 

danger  of  its  failing  to  exercise  the  thinking  faculty  and 
merely  leading  to  dexterity  in  the  use  of  a  formula ;  and  that 
it  is  much  more  closely  connected  with  the  practical  experi- 
ences and  needs  of  ordinary  life.  The  more  general  system,  on 
the  other  hand,  has  vastly  extended  capacity,  practises  much 
more  thoroughly  the  faculty  of  abstraction,  and  corrects  and 
enlarges  the  scientific  bases  of  the  narrower  system. 

I  think  then  that  the  Common  Logic  is  best  studied  on 
the  old  lines,  and  that  the  Symbolic  Logic  should  be  regarded 
as  a  Development  or  Generalization  of  it.  It  is  for  this 
reason  that  I  cannot  regard  the  attempts  made,  in  such  very 
different  directions,  by  Hamilton  and  Prof.  Jevons,  with  any 
great  satisfaction.  The  petty  reforms  represented  by  the 
Quantification  of  the  Predicate  and  so  forth,  seem  to  me 
to  secure  the  advantages  of  neither  system.  We  cut  ourselves 
loose  from  the  familiar  forms  of  speech,  and  yet  we  do  not 
secure  in  return  any  of  the  advantages  of  wide  generalization. 
Prof.  Jevons'  individual  reforms  seem  to  me  to  consist  mainly 
in  excising  from  Boole's  procedure  everything  which  he  finds 
an  "  obscure  form",  "  anomalous",  "  mysterious",  or  "  dark  and 
symbolic",  (Pure  Logic,  pp.  74,  75,  86).  This  he  has  certainly 
done  most  effectually,  the  result  being  to  my  thinking  that 
nearly  everything  which  is  most  characteristic  and  attractive 
in  the  system  is  thrown  away.  Thus  every  fractional  lorm 
disappears,  so  does  the  important  indeterminate  factor  $, 
and  all  the  general  functional  expressions  such  as  f(x)  and 
its  derivatives.  That  these  are  symbolic  I  freely  admit, 
but  that  they  are  dark,  mysterious,  and  obscure,  in  any  other 
sense  than  can  be  predicated  of  all  which  is  worth  a  serious 
effort  in  abstract  speculation,  or  that  they  are  anomalous  in 
any  sense  whatever,  I  wholly  deny.  In  particular,  as  will  be 
presently  pointed  out,  to  reject  fractional  forms  is  not  merely 
to  maim  our  system  by  omitting  the  necessary  inverse  process 


xxvni 


Introduction. 


to  that  of  multiplication,  but  actually  to  fall  back  behind  the 
stage  reached  by  more  than  one  logician  in  the  last  century. 
As  the  references  to  Boole  in  this  volume  are  frequently 
those  of  criticism  on  subordinate  points,  something  ought  to 
be  said  here  as  to  the  position  which  I  conceive  him  to 
occupy  as  an  exponent  of  this  subject.  His  actual  originality, 
as  will  presently  be  shown,  was  by  no  means  so  complete  as 
is  commonly  supposed  and  asserted.  But  none  the  less  I 
•hold  him  to  be  the  indisputable  and  sole  originator  of  all  the 
higher  generalizations  of  the  subject.  Other  writers  have 
spoken  of  their  "systems",  and  contrasted  them  with  that  of 
Boole1;  but  at  present  there  is,  I  think,  only  one  thing  be- 


1  Prof.  Jevons'  logical  works  are 
BO  well  known,  and  in  several  respects 
so  deservedly  popular,  that  I  have 
done  my  best  to  make  out  in  what 
relation  he  himself  considers  that  his 
exposition  of  the  subject  stands  to 
that  of  Boole ;   but  so  far  without 
success.  He  says  indeed  (Pure  Logic, 
p.  87),  "  The  work  I  have  attempted 
has  been  little  more  than  to  translate 
his  forms  into  processes  of  self-evi- 
dent meaning  and  force".     Just  so, 
but  then  (ib.  p.  83),  "My  third  objec- 
tion to  Prof.  Boole's  system  is  that  it 
is  inconsistent  with  the  self-evident 
law  of  thought,  the  Law  of  Unity". 
(Is  not  the  process  of  converting  into 
self-evident  truths  that  which  is  in- 
consistent   with    self-evident    laws, 
more  in  the  way  of '  paraphrase '  than 
of    'translation'?)    Again    (Pr.    of 
Science,  p.   113),   "It  is  wonderful 
evidence    of    his    [Boole's]    mental 
power  that  by  methods  fundamen- 
tally false,  he  should  have  succeeded 
in  reaching  true  conclusions";  but 


(Pure  Logic,  p.  3),  "The  forms  of  my 
system  may  in  fact  be  reached  by  di- 
vesting his  system  of  a  mathematical 
dress  which,  to  say  the  least,  is  not 
essential  to  it".  So  too  (Pr.  of 
Science,  p.  71),  "Boole... produced  a 
system  which,  though  wonderful  in 
its  results,  was  not  a  system  of  Logic 
at  all";  but  (ib.  p.  113),  "In  spite  of 
several  serious  errors  into  which  he 
fell,  it  will  probably  be  allowed  that 
Boole  discovered  the  true  and  general 
form  of  Logic,  and  put  the  science 
substantially  into  the  form  which  it 
must  hold  for  evermore". 

The  above  criticisms  are  intel- 
ligible when  kept  well  apart,  but  the 
following  puzzle  me  even  separate- 
ly:— "Logic  resembles  Algebra  as  the 
mould  resembles  that  which  is  cast 
in  it.  Boole  mistook  the  cast  for  the 
mould"  (Pr.  of  Science,  p.  156). 
"Boole's  system  is  like  the  shadow, 
the  ghost,  the  reflected  image  of 
Logic,  seen  among  the  derivatives  of 
Logic"  (Pure  Logic,  p.  86). 


Introduction. 


XXIX 


fore  the  world  which  can  without  abuse  of  language  be  called 
a  system,  (unless  the  single  methodical  alteration  of  marking 
alternatives  on  the  non-exclusive  plan  be  allowed  to  rank  as 
such),  and  this  is  exclusively  due  to  Boole.  Apart  from  this 
exception  (discussed  in  Chap.  XIX.)  I  have  seen  scarcely 
anything  which  deserves  to  be  called  an  enlargement  of 
Boole's  system,  scarcely  anything  indeed  but  reconstructions 
of  portions  of  that  system  with  some  modifications  of 
notation. 

But  though  the  system,  as  a  system, — that  is,  in  its  purely 
formal  shape, — seems  to  me  for  the  present  complete  and 
almost  perfect,  it  still  lies  open  to  a  good  deal  of  explanation 
and  justification.  There  is  very  little  indeed  in  Boole's  work 
which  is  erroneous,  but  there  are  many  and  serious  omissions. 
Thus  for  instance  there  is  little  or  no  interpretation  offered 
by  him  for  the  inverse  forms  and  functional  expressions. 
There  is  no  attempt  to  develop  what  may  be  called  the  genius 
of  the  system  ;  to  compare  it  with  the  traditional  system  ;  to 
examine  where  it  is  strong  and  where  it  is  weak ;  to  revise  the 
schedule  of  propositions,  their  import  and  so-  forth,  in  accord- 
ance with  this  new  theory.  To  supply  these  deficiencies 
has  been  one  of  my  main  objects,  so  that  in  point  of  fact 
the  following  pages  are  hardly  ever  occupied  with  going 
over  exactly  the  same  ground  as  he  or  others  have  tra- 
versed. 

To  those  who  already  know  something  of  the  subject  the 
following  brief  indication  will  convey  a  sufficient  account 
of  what  may  be  supposed  to  be  characteristic  and  original 
here : — The  thorough  examination  of  the  Symbolic  Logic  as 
a  whole,  that  is,  its  relation  to  ordinary  Logic  and  ordinary 
thought  and  language  :  the  establishment  and  explanation  of 
every  general  symbolic  expression  and  rule  on  purely  logical 
principles,  instead  of  looking  mainly  to  its  formal  justification; 


xxx  Introduction. 

and  the  invention  and  employment  of  a  new 1  scheme  of 
diagrammatic  notation  which  shall  be  in  true  harmony  with 
our  generalizations.  As  this  work  is  intended  to  be  an 
independent  study  of  the  subject  from  its  foundations,  and  in 
no  sense  a  commentary  or  criticism  upon  Boole,  I  have  never 
discussed  his  particular  opinions  except  where  this  seemed 
likely  to  throw  light  upon  my  own  treatment  of  the  subject. 

Such  anticipations  of  Boole's  principles  and  results  as  I 
have  succeeded  in  discovering  have,  as  a  rule,  been  mentioned 
in  notes  at  the  appropriate  places.  I  have  been  the  more 
careful  to  do  this  owing  to  the  remarkable  absence  of  any 
such  references  in  almost  every  recent  treatise  on  Symbolic 
Logic  ;  on  which  subject  indeed  one  may  say,  as  Hamilton 
did  on  another  branch  of  science,  that  "it  seems  to  have 
been  fated  that  every  writer  should  either  be  ignorant  of  or 
should  ignore  his  predecessors "  (Discussions,  p.  183).  It 
would  certainly  seem  that  Boole  had  no  suspicion  that  any 
one  before  himself  had  ever  applied  algebraic  notation  to 
Logic  :  (I  am  far  from  urging  this  as  a  reproach,  for  few  men 
have  had  slighter  opportunities  for  research  than  were  open 
to  him  during  the  greater  part  of  his  life  :  moreover  any 
anticipations  which  he  could  have  found  of  his  grander 
generalizations  are  indeed  scanty  and  remote).  Professor 
Jevons  has  roundly  asserted,  (Principles  of  Science,  Ed.  I. 
1874,  p.  39),  that  "  Boole  is  the  only  logician  in  modern  times 

1  I  have  only  during  the  last  few  tions  are   carried   out    on   the   old 

weeks  seen H-Scbeftler'aNaturgesetze,  Eulerian  plan,  but  he  also  adopts  a 

Vol.  in.     The  work  is  far  too  large  plan  of  shading  his  diagrams,  which 

for  me  to  have  had  time  to  do  more  seems  in  all  essential  points  the  same 

than  glance  at  it,  but  I  see  that  he  as  mine.  Which  scheme  was  actually 

has  adopted  a  plan  of  diagrammatic  published  first  I  do  not  know ;   his 

notation  which    makes    it  doubtful  work  is  dated  1880,  and  my  paper  in 

whether  the  word  'new*  ought  to  be  the  Phil.  Magazine  appeared  in  the 

left  standing.     Some  of  his  illustra-  July  number  of  the  same  year. 


Introduction. 


xxxi 


who  has  drawn  attention  to"  the  logical  law1  that  A  —  A  A. 
Frege  (Begriffsschrift,  1877),  has  no  reference  to  any  symbolic 
predecessor  except  a  vague  mention  of  Leibnitz.  R.  Grass- 
mann's  Begriffslehre,  (1872),  has,  I  think,  no  reference  what- 
ever to  any  predecessor  in  this  line.  Delboeuf  wrote  the 
original  of  his  Logique  Algorithmique  (in  the  Revue  Philo- 
sophique,  1876),  without  having  heard  of  Boole,  as  Mr  Maccoll 
tells  us  he  wrote  his  papers  without  having  read  that  work. 

It  is  true  that  since  Leslie  Ellis  and  Mr  Harley  called 
attention  to  some  of  the  pregnant  hints  given  by  Leibnitz  25 
he  at  least  has  been  occasionally  referred  to.  But  I  hope  that 
this  volume  will  convince  the  reader  that  there  are  some  more 


1  Three  perfectly  explicit  antici- 
pations may  be  mentioned  here,  be- 
sides that  of  Leibnitz  referred  to  in 
the  next  note.     First,  Lambert,   as 
quoted  below.     Secondly,  Ploucquet, 
who  in  discussing  an  example   for- 
mally stated  as  'N  is  g,  N  is  r,  N 
is/',  goes  on  to  say,  "Nun  ware 

ungereimt     zu     setzen NNNgrf, 

sondern  es  muss  nur  so  ausgedriickt 
werden,  Ngrf".     (Sammlung,  &c.  p. 
254  : — Some  account  of  the  notation 
will  be  found  in  Chap,  xx.)  Thirdly, 
Segner;  "Subjecti  enim  idea  cum  se 
ipsa  composita  novam  ideam  produ- 
cere  nequit ;  pariterque ;   Linea   est 
extensa,  curvum  est  extensum,  ergo 
linea  curva  est  extensa,  ubi  praedica- 
tum  cum   se  ipso  compositum  non 
mutatur"  (Specimen  Logicte,  p.  148). 
I  have   little    doubt   that    any  one 
better  acquainted  than  myself  with 
the  Leibnitzian  and  Wolfian  logicians 
could  add  many  more  such  notices. 

2  Ellis  first  called  attention  to 


Leibnitz,  in  this  connection,  in  a  note 
to  Vol.  i.  (p.  281)  of  the  edition  of 
Bacon's  works  by  him  and  Mr  Sped- 
ding  (1858);  but  the  reference  there 
given  to  p.  130  of  Erdmann's  edition 
is  clearly  wrong.  Mr  Harley  sug- 
gested (Eep.  of 'Brit.  Ass.,  1866)  that 
Ellis  probably  meant  to  refer  to  p. 
103,  where  Leibnitz  represents  the 
proposition  'All  A  is  B'  in  a  form 
equivalent  to  A  =  AB,  for  when  A—B 
we  have  A=AA.  A  more  appropriate 
passage,  I  think,  is  to  be  found  in  the 
Non  inelegans  specimen  demonstrandi 
in  abstractis,  (Erdmann,  p.  95),  where 
Leibnitz  says  "si  idem  secum  ipso 
sumatur  nihil  coustituitur  novum, 
seu  A  +  A  oo  A  ",  where  oo  is  a  sign  of 
identity.  At  first  sight  this  looks 
like  a  statement  of  Prof.  Jevons' 
'Law  of  Simplicity',  viz.  A  +  A  =  A. 
But  we  must  remember  that  Leibnitz 
represented  by  his  symbols  attributes 
rather  than  classes,  (this  becomes  evi- 
dent when  he  gives  a  concrete  in 


xxxii  Introduction. 

serious  and  successful  attempts  at  Symbolic  Logic,  which 
deserve  notice  at  the  hands  of  those  who  undertake  to  treat 
the  subject.  At  least  it  would  be  well  to  consult  some  of 
these  before  laying  down  what  has  not  been  said  or  done  by 
any  who  have  gone  before  us.  Of  the  labours  of  one  of  these 
writers,  Lambert, — "  der  unvergleichliche  Mann  ",  as  Kant 
himself  termed  him, — it  will  be  best  to  give  a  very  succinct 
account  here,  since  the  references  afforded  by  occasional 
notes  will  not  yield  any  adequate  impression  of  the  remarkable 
progress  he  had  made.  To  my  thinking,  he  and  Boole  stand 
quite  supreme  in  this  subject,  in  the  way  of  originality ;  and 
if  the  latter  had  knowingly  built  upon  the  foundation  laid 
by  his  predecessor,  instead  of  beginning  anew  for  himself, 
it  would  be  hard  to  say  which  of  the  two  had  actually  done 
the  most. 

Summarily  stated,  then,  Lambert  had  got  as  far  as  this. 
He  fully  recognized  that  the  four  algebraic  operations  of 
addition,  subtraction,  multiplication,  and  division,  have  each 
an  analogue  in  Logic ;  that  they  may  there  be  respectively 
termed  aggregation,  separation, determination,  and  abstraction, 
and  be  symbolized '  by  +,  —,  x,  +.  He  also  perceived  the 

stance:  Homo- rationalis  oo  brutum,  essays  were  first  published  by  Erd- 
where  the  subtraction  is  plainly  in-  mann  in  1840.  All  the  principal 
tensive  not  extensive).  'Addition 'of  logical  extracts  are  also  very  con- 
attributes,  as  explained  below  (p.  300),  veniently  brought  together  in  a  little 
is  almost  equivalent  to  'mnltiplica-  volume  by  Kvfit  (Leilmitzeri's  Logik, 
tion'  of  classes.  Accordingly  the  1857). 

formula  in  question  becomes  really  1  One  of  the  clearest  statements 

equivalent  to  Boole's  AA  =  A.     Prof.  to  this  effect  is  in  the  Logische  Ab- 

Jevons  has  also  pointed  out  (Pr.  of  handlungen,  i.  150 :  but  it  is  too  long 

Sc.  Ed.  n.  1876,  Pref.  p.  13),  a  pas-  to  quote.     (My  readers  will  find  seve- 

sage  at  p.  98,  which  is  in  closer  literal  ral  extracts  of   similar  purport    in 

accord:  "ut  b  est  aa,  vel  bb  est  a,...  various  notes  in  Chh.  n.    and  in.) 

Bufticit  enim  dici  a  est  6".  The  logical  equivalents  he  actually 

Students    of    Leibnitz    are    well  uses  are  Zusammensetzung,  Abson- 

aware  that  several  of  his  short  logical  derung,  Bestimmung,  Abstraction. 


Introduction. 


xxxiu 


inverse  nature  of  the  second  and  fourth  as  compared  with  the 
first  and  third  l ;  and  no  one  could  state  more  clearly  that 
we  must  not  confound  the  mathematical  with  the  logical 
signification8.  He  enunciates  with  perfect  clearness  the 
principal  logical  laws,  such  as  the  commutative,  the  distri- 
butive, and  the  associative 3,  and  (under  restrictions  to  be 
presently  noticed)  the  special  law4  AA=A.  He  develops 
simple  logical  expressions  precisely  as  Boole  does5,  though 
without  assigning  any  generalized  formulae  for  the  purpose. 
He  fully  understood  that  the  distinctive  merit  of  such  a 
system  was  to  be  found  in  its  capacity  of  grappling  with 
highly  complicated  terms  and  propositions;  and  he  accord- 
ingly applies  it  to  examples  which  however  simple  they  may 
seem  to  a  modern  symbolist  represent  a  very  great  advance 


1  "  Die  Operationen  +  und  -  sind 
einander  entgegengesetzt  und  sie  lei- 
den  einerlei  Verwechselungen  wie  in 
der  Algeber"  (ib.  n.  62). 

2  »i  ^yjj,  haben  die  Beweise  der 
Zeiehnungsart    kurz   angezeigt,  die 
Zeichen  selbst  aus  der  Algeber  ge- 
nommen,   und   nur  ihre  Bedeutung 
allgemeiner  gemacht"  (Log.  Ab.    i. 
137). 

z  "Da  man  in  vielen  Sprachen 
das  Adjectivum  vor-  und  nach-setzen 
kann,  so  ist  es  auch  einerlei  ob  man 
iiB  oder  Rn  setzt"  (ib.  i.  p.  150). 

"  Da  es  in  der  Zeichenkunst  einer- 
lei ist  ob  man  a  +  b  oder  6  +  a  setzt" 
(ib.  i.  p.  33). 

"Will  man  aber  setzen  (m  +  n)A, 
so  ist  dieses  -mA  +nA.  Es  sei 

m=n+p+q 
und          A 
so  hat  man 


4  "Man  kann  zu  einem  Begriffe 
nicht  Merkmale  hinzusetzen  die  er 
schon  hat...  weil  man  sonst  sagen 
konnte  ein  eisernes  Eisen'\  (ib.  n.  133). 
The  reason  why  he  did  not  admit 
this  law  universally  was  (as  presently 
noticed)  that  he  endeavoured  to  make 
his  formulae  cover  relations  as  well  as 
common  logical  predications.     This 
comes  out  clearly  in  the  following 
passage:   "Wenn  der  Begriff— a  ist, 
ay  das  Geschlecht,  a.yn  ein  hoheres 
Geschlecht,  a.8  der  Unterschied,  a5" 
ein  hoherer  Unterschied,  ay  +  aS  —  a. 
die  Erklarung,  (ay  +  ad)n  oder  a  (7  +  5) " 
eine  hohere  Erklarung"  i.e.  a  being 
a  true  logical  class  term  an  =  a;  but 
7,   being  a  relative  term,  7™    does 
not  =  7,  (ib.  p.  133). 

5  His  formula  is  a  —  ax  +  a\x  (where 
a\x  means  a  not-x,  viz.  our  ax).    He 
also  has  x  +  y—2xy  +  x\y  +  y\x ;  just 
as  Boole  develops  the  expression. 


XXXIV 


Introduction. 


beyond  the  syllogism l.  Moreover,  in  this  spirit  of  generali- 
zation, he  proposed  an  ingenious  system  of  notation,  of  a 
1  and  0  description,  for  the  2"  combinations  which  may  be 
yielded  by  the  introduction  of  n  class  terms  or  attributes 2. 
Hypothetical  propositions  he  interpreted  and  represented  pre- 
cisely as  we  should  3.  Still  more  noteworthy  is  the  fact  that 
in  one  passage  at  least  he  recognized  that  the  inverse  process, 
marked  by  division,  is  an  indeterminate  one4. 

These  are  the  main  truths  of  this  kind  which  Lambert 
had  seized.  Whatever  the  defects  and  limitations  in  their 
expression  they  represent  a  very  remarkable  advance  on  any 
thing  known  to  have  been  done  before  him.  Where  he 
mainly  went  astray  was,  I  think,  in  the  following  respects. 

course  there  are  great  imperfections 
in  such  a  scheme. 

3  "Die  allgemeinste  Formel  der 
hypothetischen  Siitze  ist  diese,  Wenn 
A  ein  B  ist,  so  ist  es  C.     Diese  For- 
mel kann  allezeit  mit  der  folgenden 
venvechselt  werden ;  Alles  A  so  B  ist, 
ist  C.  Nun  ist,  Alles  A  eo  B  ist  =  .423. 
Folglich,  Alles  AB  ist  C.     Daher  die 
Zeichnung  AB>C  oder  AB  =  mC" 
(ib.  i.  128). 

4  "  Wenn  xy  =  ay,  so  ist 

-       -1=    2 

y' 

Aber  deswegen  nicht  allezeit  x=a; 
sondern  nur  in  einem  einzigeu  Falle, 
weil  x  und  a  zwei  verschiedene  Arten 
von  dem  Geschlecht  xy  oder  ay  seiu 
konnen.  Wenn  aber  xy  =  ay  nicht 
welter  bestimmt  wird,  so  kann  man 
unter  andern  auch  ar  =  a  setzen"  (ib. 
i.  9),  (as  this  expressly  refers  to  rela- 
tive terms  only  it  is  not  at  variance 
with  the  note  below,  at  p.  hO). 


1  Take,  for  instance,  the  follow- 
ing:— 

F :: H=S  :: (P+  G) :: V  ::(A  +  C  +  Se) 
as  expressive  of  "Die  Gluckseligkeit 
des  Menschen  besteht  in  der  Euiplin- 
dung  des  Besitzes  und  Genusses  der 
VollkommenLheiten  des  innerlichen 
und  ausserlichen  Zustandes".  The 
sign  ::  here  denotes  a  relation  (ib.  i. 
56). 

3  His  scheme  is  this.  Let  1  re- 
present the) presence,  and  0  the  ab- 
sence of  any  attribute.  Then,  if  we 
keep  the  order  in  which  the  terms 
stand  in  our  expression  unaltered, 
10101  and  10111  will  take  the  place 
of  what  we  might  indicate  by  xyzwv 
and  xyzwv.  He  then  compares  the 
extent  to  which  various  complex 
terms  thus  agree  with  each  other  or 
differ.  He  also  employs  the  slightly 
more  convenient  notation  of  letters 
and  their  negation,  thus:  ABC,  ABO, 
AOO,  and  so  on,  to  stand  for  our 
ABC,  ABC,  ABC,  (ib.  n.  134).  Of 


Introduction.  xxxv 

Though  he  realized  very  clearly  that  logical  division  is  the 
inverse  of  multiplication,  he  failed  to  observe  the  indefinite 
character  commonly  assumed  by  inverse  operations: — that  is, 
he  failed  to  observe  it  except  in  certain  special  cases,  as  just 
pointed  out.  He  regarded  the  inverse  as  being  merely  the 
putting  back  a  thing,  so  to  say,  where  it  was  before1,  and  ac- 
cordingly omitted  altogether  that  surplus  indefinite  term 
yielded  by  logical  division,  and  which  is  so  characteristic  of 
Boole's  treatment.  Probably  no  logician  before  Boole  (with 
the  very  doubtful  exception  of  H.  Grassmann,  as  mentioned 
in  the  note  on  p.  204)  ever  conceived  a  hint  of  this,  as  not 
many  after  him  seem  to  have  understood  or  appreciated  it. 
As  a  consequence  of  this,  Lambert  too  freely  uses  mathe- 
matical rules  which  are  not  justifiable  in  Logic.  For 
instance,  from  AB=CD  he  assumes  that  we  may  conclude 
A:C=D:B. 

Another  point  that  misled  Lambert  was  the  belief  that 
his  rules  and  definitions  would  cover  the  case  of  relative 
terms2.  This  will  explain  what  might  otherwise  seem  a 
complete  misapprehension  of  the  very  first  principles  of  the 
Symbols  of  Logic,  viz.  his  admission  of  powers,  e.g.  of  the 
difference  between  mA  and  m*A.  I  think  it  a  mistake  to 
endeavour  thus  to  introduce  relative  terms,  but,  if  we  do  so, 
we  must  clearly  reject  the  law  that  a?  =  x,  in  the  case  of 
such  terms. 

In  thus  realizing  what  Lambert  had  achieved  (I  have 
purposely  brought  a  number  of  extracts  together  as  the  only 

1  "Auch  ist  klar  dass  man  sich  Kalkul  +  und -,  xund-f-"(i&. n.  150). 
dabei    Operationen    muss    gedenken  2  "Unter  den  Begriffen  M— A  :  B 

konnen,wodurch  die  veranderte  Sache  kommen  einige  vor,  die  sehr  allgemein 

in  den  vorigen  Stand  konnte  herge-  sind.  Dahin  rechnen  wir  die  Begriffe ; 

stelltwerden.  DieseWiederherstellung  Ursache,  Wirkung,   Mittel,  Absicht, 

giebt  demnach  den  Begriff  der  reci-  Grund,  Art  und  Gattung  "  (Architec- 

proken  Operationen,  dergleichen  im  tonic,  i.  82). 


xxxvi  Introduction. 

way  of  conveying  a  just  idea  of  their  combined  effect, 
though  several  of  them  have  been  quoted  elsewhere  in  this 
volume)  the  reader  must  remember  that  he  by  no  means 
stood  alone.  Two  of  his  friends  or  correspondents, — 
Ploucquet  and  Holland, — are  worthy  coadjutors;  and  such 
logical  writings  as  they  have  left  behind  are  full  of  interest- 
ing suggestions  of  a  similar  kind,  as  the  reader  will  see  by 
referring  to  their  names  under  the  references  in  the  bibli- 
ographical index  at  the  end.  These  men  all  took  their 
impulse  from  Leibnitz  and  Wolf.  During  the  80  or  90  years 
which  elapsed  from  their  day  to  that  of  Boole  there  was 
almost  a  blank  in  the  history  of  the  subject,  for  we  cannot 
put  the  efforts  of  Maimon  and  Darjes  into  the  same  category, 
ingenious  as  these  were.  One  cannot  but  speculate  upon 
the  causes  of  this  total  disregard  of  these  remarkable 
speculations1;  a  disregard  which  had  already  astonished 
J.  Bernoulli,  the  editor  of  Lambert's  posthumous  works  and 

1  Lambert's  Neuea  Organon  is  fre-  several  reviews  of  these,  and  some 
quently  referred  to,  in  connexion  with  interesting  letters  by  Lambert  and 
his  doctrine  of  the  different  principles  Holland.  I  know  of  no  independent 
which  govern  the  four  Syllogistic  logical  treatises  by  Holland  except  a 
Figures ;  but  none  of  his  best  Symbolic  very  small  volume  entitled  ' '  A  bhand- 
Bpeculations  are  to  be  found  there.  lung  iiber  die  Slathematik,  die  allge- 
These  are  given  most  fully  in  the  meine  Zeichenkumt  und  die  Venchie- 
Logisctie  Abhandlungen  ;  but  several  denheit  der  Rechnungsarten,  (1764). 
of  the  important  principles  are  also  For  procuring  me  access  to  Ploucquet's 
to  be  found  in  the  Architectonic ;  in  works  and  Lambert's  Log.  Abhand- 
his  Brieficechsel  (Vol.  i.);  in  his  cor-  lungen,  and  others,  I  have  to  thank 
respondence  with  Ploucquet,  in  the  Prof.  Croom  Robertson  of  University 
collected  logical  works  of  the  latter ;  College,  London.  (The  library  of  thin 
and  in  a  paper  in  the  Nova  Act  a  College  deserves  to  be  better  known. 
Eruditorum  for  1765.  The  only  work  Several  of  the  works  of  most  import- 
by  Ploucquet  which  I  have  seen  is  ance  for  my  purpose  were  not,  so  far 
the  one  just  mentioned,  and  referred  as  I  could  ascertain,  to  be  found  in 
to  throughout  this  volume  as  the  any  other  likely  library  in  the  kiny- 
"Sammlung".  It  contains,  I  believe  doin.) 
nearly  all  his  logical  treatises;  also 


Introduction.  xxxvii 

letters,  and  which  has  been  so  complete  since  then  that  I 
have  never  even  seen  these  speculations  of  his  referred  to 
by  any  modern  symbolic  logician.  For  myself  I  confess  to 
an  uneasy  suspicion  that,  great  as  may  have  been  the  in- 
fluence for  good  of  Kant  in  philosophy,  he  had  a  disastrous 
effect  on  logical  speculation.  In  any  case  it  is  instructive 
to  notice  the  vigour  and  originality  with  which  the  science 
was  being  treated  whilst  the'  great  philosopher  was  still 
to  be  spoken  of  as  "Herr  Immanuel  Kant,  Professor  der 
Philosophic  zu  Konigsberg  in  Preussen"  (Lambert's  Brief- 
wechsel),  with  the  monotonous  flood  of  logical  treatises  which 
spread  over  Germany  for  so  long  afterwards,  and  the  wash  of 
which  reached  us  in  the  works  of  Hamilton  and  Mansel.  I 
deeply  admire  the  learning  and  acuteness  of  many  of  these 
works  produced  during  the  days  of  strictest  preservation 
from  mathematical  encroachment,  but  confess  that  they  seem 
to  me  rather  narrow  in  comparison  with  what  was  produced 
when  the  spirit  and  the  procedure  of  the  sister  science  were 
more  freely  welcomed  by  the  logician. 

For  the  convenience  of  the  reader  a  few  brief  biblio- 
graphical notes  are  added  in  conclusion.  Boole's  logical 
publications,  so  far  as  I  know,  are  the  following : — 

The  Mathematical  Analysis  of  Logic  (1847). 

The  Calculus  of  Logic.     (Camb.  Math.  Journal,  1848.) 

Lecture  delivered  at  Cork  (1851 — touches  slightly  on  the 
subject). 

The  Laws  of  Thought  (1854). 

On  Propositions  numerically  definite.  (Camb.  Phil.  Tr.  XI.) 
There  does  not  seem  to  me  to  be  anything  much  of  value 
in  the  first  three  beyond  what  is  given  more  fully  in  his 
mature  work.  There  are  also  a  variety  of  papers  of  a  more 
mathematical  kind,  mostly  on  Probability,  in  the  Philoso- 
phical Magazine,  and  elsewhere. 


xxxviii  Introduction. 

As  regards  the  incidents  of  his  life,  there  is  a  good 
account  in  an  article  by  Mr  Harley  in  the  British  Quarterly 
Review  for  July  1866.  The  reader  will  also  be  interested  by 
three  papers  of  a  more  domestic  character  (by  his  widow)  in 
the  University  Magazine  for  Jan.  Feb.  and  March,  1878. 
They  are  entitled  "The  Home  side  of  a  scientific  mind." 

Though  Boole's  productions  did  not  encounter  the  neg- 
lect which  befell  those  of  Lambert1,  his  admirers  will  mostly 
agree  that  they  have  not  yet  been  appreciated  and  utilized 
as  they  deserve.  I  do  not  propose  (as  already  remarked) 
that  they  should  be  incorporated  into  the  common  system, 
still  less  that  they  should  supersede  it;  but  one  might  well 
have  expected  some  more  serious  attempts  at  criticism  and 
exposition  of  their  general  spirit,  purport,  and  place  in  the 
science  of  inference.  There  have  been,  it  need  not  be  said, 
many  minor  criticisms  and  references  in  Journals  and  inde- 
pendent works,  especially  of  recent  years.  All  of  these 
which  I  have  seen,  and  which  appeared  deserving  of  notice, 
will  be  found  referred  to  in  the  Index.  Three  notices  of  a 
more  distinctly  expository  kind  have  been  given  respectively 
by  Mr  Harley,  Prof.  Bain,  and  Prof.  Liard  of  Bordeaux. 

1  There  is  a  curious  correspond-  Lambert  was  born  at  Mtilhausen 
ence  in  the  circumstances  of  the  two  in  Elsass,— the  town  was  at  that 
men.  Each  was  born  in  very  humble  time  connected  with  the  Swiss  Con- 
circumstances ;  was  almost  entirely  federation, —in  1728.  He  lived  for 
self-educated, — that  is,  was  trained  some  years  as  tutor  to  the  family  of 
at  no  University  or  superior  school ; —  Count  de  Sails  in  Chiir.  He  moved 
and  had  to  do  much  of  the  work  of  to  Augsburg  in  the  year  1759,  where 
his  earlier  life  against  the  disadvan-  he  was  "agrege'  a  1' Academic  filecto- 
tages  of  a  pressure  of  routine  and  rale  de  Baviere,  avec  le  titre  de  pro- 
elementary  educational  work,  and  fesseur  honoraire  et  un  traitement", 
comparative  absence  of  intercourse  (Biographic  gtnirale,  Didot),  and  to 
with  scientific  society.  They  were  Berlin  in  17C3,  where  he  was  "aca- 
both  first-rate  mathematicians.  They  dciuicicn  pensionnaire."  He  died 
died  at  the  same  age,  viz.  forty-nine.  there  in  1777. 


Introduction. 


xxxix 


The  two  former  (Brit.  Quarterly,  July,  1S66 ;  Deductive 
Logic,  pp.  190 — 207)  are  very  brief,  but  trustworthy.  The 
latter  is  of  a  more  ambitious  kind,  being  an  attempt  to  give  a 
general  account  of  the  "  Modern  English  Logic/'  i.e.  of  the 
works  of  Mr  G.  Bentham,  Hamilton,  De  Morgan,  Boole,  and 
Prof.  Jevons.  He  has  evidently  taken  pains  to  study  these 
authors,  and  the  volume  possesses  the  national  merit  of 
lively  and  transparently  clear  exposition  of  all  that  is  under- 
stood, but  its  critical  value  seems  to  me  of  a  humble  order. 
The  portions  treating  respectively  of  the  works  of  Boole  and 
Prof.  Jevons  had  already  appeared  in  substance  in  the 
Revue  Philosophique  for  March  and  Sep.,  1877. 

I  take  this  opportunity  of  referring  to  two  works  which 
have  only  come  under  my  notice  since  this  volume  was 
already  under  the  printer's  hands.  The  first  of  these  is  H. 
Scheffler's  Naturgesetze,  which,  (having  only  quite  recently 
seen  it,)  1  have  not  had  time  to  do  more  than  glance  at.  As 
indicated  in  a  note  some  pages  back  the  author's  scheme  of 
diagrammatic  notation  seems  nearly  the  same  as  mine.  Of 
the  general  treatment  of  Logic  adopted  by  him  it  would  be 
presumptuous  to  form  an  opinion,  seeing  that  the  third 
volume  (the  one  mostly  dealing  with  this  subject)  contains 
742  closely  printed  pages.  The  other  work  is  Prof.  Jevons' 
Studies  in  Deductive  Logic.  This  seems  to  me  decidedly  the 
best  collection  of  logical  examples  to  be  found, — indeed  the 
only  good  one  I  have  ever  seen.  Had  it  appeared  earlier  it 
might  have  saved  me  some  trouble  in  the  composition  of  my 
own  work.  As  it  was,  not  being  able  to  find  any  good 
examples  which  were  sufficiently  complicated  to  illustrate 
the  symbolic  methods,  except  one  or  two  well-worn  ones  first 
proposed  by  Boole,  I  had  to  work  them  all  out  for  myself. 
Except  therefore  where  otherwise  stated  the  examples  are  my 
own  composition. 


COREIGENDA  ET  ADDENDA. 

p.  9.  Note.  The  statement  that  Hamilton  maintains  that  the  scheme  of 
eight  propositions  "is  not  connected  with  the  quantification  doctrine"  is 
perhaps  rather  too  strong  ;  but  I  find  much  difficulty  in  understanding 
his  remark  that  his  "doctrine  has,  and  could  have,  no  novelty  from  a 
mere  recognition,  as  possible,  of  the  eight  prepositional  forms."  (Dis- 
cussiow,  p.  162). 

p.  78.  Note  1.  The  last  reference  should  be  to  Gunther  (not  Giihring)  in 
the  Vierteljahrsschrift  fiir  wissenschaftliche  Philosophic  for  1879. 

p.  144.     For  A.  T.  Ellis  read  A.  J.  Ellis. 

p.  158.     For  1877  read  1876. 

p.  174.  Note  2.  This  note  must  be  supplemented  and  corrected  by  that  on 
p.  324. 


SYMBOLIC  LOGIC. 
CHAPTER  I. 

ON   THE  FORMS  OF  LOGICAL  PROPOSITION. 

IT  has  been  mentioned  in  the  Introduction  that  the  System 
of  Logic  which  this  work  is  intended  to  expound  is  not 
merely  an  extension  of  the  ordinary  methods — though  this  is 
perhaps  its  principal  characteristic — but  that  it  also  involves 
a  considerable  change  from  the  ordinary  point  of  view.  This 
latter  characteristic  is  one  which  has  not,  I  think,  been 
sufficiently  attended  to  in  discussions  upon  the  subject,  and 
the  neglect  of  it  has  blunted  the  point  of  much  of  the 
criticism  on  one  side  and  the  other.  I  propose  therefore, 
before  explaining  the  foundations  on  which  the  Symbolic 
Logic  must  be  understood  to  rest,  to  give  a  brief  discussion 
of  the  corresponding  substructure  in  the  case  of  some  other 
systems  with  which  the  reader  is  likely  to  be  more  or  less 
familiar.  It  will  be  readily  understood  that  we  shall  not  dig 
down  any  deeper  than  is  absolutely  necessary,  and  this  is 
fortunately  not  far  below  the  surface.  Psychological  questions 
need  not  concern  us  here;  and  still  less  those  which  are  Meta- 
physical. Differences  of  this  kind  have  very  little,  if  any, 
direct  relation  to  one  logical  method  rather  than  another. 
V.  L.  1 


2        t         On  the  Forms  of  Logical  Proposition.          [CHAP. 

If  we  were  constructing  a  complete  Theory  of  Logic  we 
should  have  to  attack  the  question  as  to  what  is  the  true 
account,  by  which  we  should  understand  the  most  fundamental 
account,  of  the  nature  and  import  of  a  proposition,  and  on 
this  point  different  accounts  would  be  to  some  extent  in 
direct  hostility  to  one  another.  But  when  we  are  discussing 
methods  rather  than  theories  this  is  not  necessarily  so.  The 
question  then  becomes,  which  is  the  most  convenient  account 
rather  than  which  is  the  most  fundamental;  and  convenience 
is  dependent  upon  circumstances,  varying  according  to  the 
particular  purpose  we  have  in  view.  So  far  as  we  are  now 
concerned  there  seem  to  be  three  different  accounts  of  the 
import  of  a  proposition;  the  ordinary  or  predication  view,  the 
class  inclusion  and  exclusion  view,  and  that  which  may  be 
called  the  compartmental  view.  It  may  perhaps  be  main- 
tained that  one  of  these  views  must  be  more  fundamental 
than  the  others,  or  possess  a  better  psychological  warrant, 
but  it  cannot  be  denied  that  they  are  all  three  tenable  views; 
that  is,  that  we  may,  if  we  please,  interpret  a  proposition  in 
accordance  with  any  one  of  the  three.  And  this  is  sufficient 
for  our  present  purpose. 

The  question  to  be  here  discussed  is  simply  this.  What 
are  the  prominent  characteristics  of  each  of  these  distinct,  but 
not  hostile,  views?  What  are  their  relative  advantages  and 
disadvantages;  to  what  arrangement  and  division  of  pro- 
positional  forms  do  they  respectively  lead;  and,  in  con- 
sequence, which  of  them  must  be  adopted  if  we  wish  to  carry 
out  the  design  of  securing  the  widest  extension  possible  of 
our  logical  processes  by  the  aid  of  symbols? 

The  neglect  of  some  such  enquiry  as  this  seems  to  me  to 
have  led  to  error  and  confusion.  Logicians  have  been  too 
much  in  the  habit  of  considering  that  there  could  be  only 
one  account  given  of  the  impoit  of  propositions.  In  con- 


I.]  On  the  Forms  of  Logical  Proposition.  3 

sequence,  instead  of  discussing  the  number  of  forms  of  pro- 
position demanded  by  one  or  the  other  view,  they  have 
attempted  to  decide  absolutely  the  number  of  forms.  This 
has  led,  as  every  one  acquainted  with  the  subject  is  aware, 
to  a  most  bewildering  variety  of  treatment  in  many  recent 
logical  works.  And  the  very  useful  question  as  to  the  fittest 
view  for  this  or  that  purpose  has  been  lost  in  the  too 
summary  decision  that  one  view  was  right,  and  consequently 
the  others  wrong. 

Let  us  first  look  at  the  traditional  four  forms,  A,E,I,  0,  in 
reference  to  which  a  very  few  words  will  here  suffice.  The  light 
in  which  a  proposition  has  to  be  consistently  interpreted  on  this 
view  is  that  of  predication.  We  distinguish  between  subjec; 
and  attribute  here,  and  we  assert  that  a  given  subject  does 
or  does  not  possess  certain  attributes.  These  forms  appear 
to  be  naturally  determined  by  the  ordinary  needs  of  mankind, 
and  the  ordinary  pre-logical  modes  of  expressing  those  needs; 
all  that  Logic  has  done  being  to  make  them  somewhat  more 
precise  in  their  signification  than  they  conventionally  are. 
They  adopt,  as  just  remarked,  the  natural  and  simple  method 
of  asserting  or  denying  attributes  of  a  subject,  that  is,  of  the 
whole  or  part  of  a  subject;  whence  they  naturally  yield  four 
forms, — the  universal  and  particular,  affirmative  and  negative. 
For  all  ordinary  purposes  they  answer  admirably  as  they  are, 
and  by  a  little  management  they  can  be  made  to  express 
nearly  all  the  simple  forms  of  assertion  or  denial  which  the 
1mm  an  mind  can  well  want  to  express. 

With  regard  to  these  forms  it  must  be  very  decidedly 
maintained  that  as  they  generally  and  primarily  regard  the 
predicate  in  the  light  of  an  attribute,  and  the  subject  in  that 
of  a  class  (whole  or  part),  they  do  not  naturally  quantify  this 
predicate:  that  is,  they  do  not  tell  us  whether  any  other 
things  besides  the  whole  or  partial  class  referred  to  in  the 

1—2 


4  On  the  Forms  of  Logical  Proposition.          [CHAP. 

subject  possess  the  assigned  attribute.  No  doubt  they  some- 
times decide  this  point  indirectly.  Thus,  in  the  case  of  a 
universal  negative  proposition  we  can  easily  see  that  any 
thing  which  possesses  the  attributes  in  the  predicate  cannot 
possess  the  attributes  distinctive  of  the  subject;  that  is,  that 
the  proposition  can  be  simply  converted.  But  this  does  not 
seern  to  be  any  part  of  the  primary  meaning  of  the  proposition, 
which  thinks  of  nothing  but  asserting  or  denying  an  attribute, 
and  does  not  directly  enquire  about  the  extent  of  that 
attribute,  or  where  else  it  is  or  is  not  to  be  found. 

As  just  remarked,  these  forms  of  proposition  certainly 
seem  to  represent  the  most  primitive  and  natural  modes  in 
which  thought  begins  to  express  itself  with  accuracy1.  By 
combining  two  or  more  of  them  together  they  can  readily  be 
made  equivalent  to  much  more  complicated  forms.  Thus, 
by  combining  'All  X  is  Y*  with  'All  Y  is  X,'  we  obtain  the 
expression  'All  X  is  all  Y,'  or  'X  and  Y  are  coextensive,'  and  so 
forth.  As  these  familiar  old  forms  have  many  centuries  of 
possession  in  their  favour,  and  the  various  technical  terms 
and  rules  for  Conversion  and  Opposition,  and  for  the  Syllo- 
gism, have  been  devised  for  them,  there  seem  to  be  very 
strong  reasons  for  not  disturbing  them  from  the  position  they 
have  so  long  occupied.  At  least  this  should  only  be  done  if 
it  could  be  shewn  either  that  they  are  actually  insufficient 
to  express  what  we  require  to  express,  or  that  they  rest  upon 
a  wrong  interpretation  of  the  import  of  a  proposition.  The 
former  is  clearly  not  the  case,  for  as  was  just  remarked  (and 
as  no  one  would  deny)  a  combination  of  two  or  more  of  these 
forms  will  express  almost  anything  in  the  way  of  a  non- 

1  At  least  this  seems  so  in  all  the  ment  of  the  forms  of  propositions  in 

languages  with  which  we  need  con-  non-inflectional  languages  must  be 

sider    ourselves    concerned.     What  left  to  philologists  to  determine, 
might  be  the  most  natural  arrange- 


I.]  On  the  Forms  of  Logical  Proposition.  5 

numerical  statement.  And  as  regards  the  latter,  the  point  of 
this  chapter  is  to  shew  that  we  are  not  necessarily  tied  down 
to  one  exclusive  view  as  to  the  import  of  a  proposition;  a 
point  which  must  be  left  to  justify  itself  in  the  sequel.  I 
should  say,  therefore,  that  whatever  other  view  we  may  find 
it  convenient  to  adopt  for  special  purposes-,  either  of  sensible 
illustration  or  with  a  view  to  solving  intricate  combinations 
of  statements,  there  is  no  valid  reason  for  not  retaining  the 
old  forms  as  well.  They  may  not  be  the  most  suitable 
materials  for  very  complicated  reasonings,  but  for  the  ex- 
pression and  improvement  of  ordinary  thought  and  speech 
they  are  not  likely  to  be  surpassed. 

So  much  for  this  view.  Now  suppose  that,  instead  of 
regarding  the  proposition  as  made  up  of  a  subject  determined 
by  a  predicate,  we  regard  it  as  assigning  the  relations,  in  the 
way  of  mutual  inclusion  and  exclusion,  of  two  classes  to  one 
another.  It  will  hardly  be  disputed  that  every  proposition 
can  be  so  interpreted.  Of  course,  as  already  remarked,  this 
interpretation  may  not  be  the  most  fundamental  in  a  Psycho- 
logical sense;  but  when,  as  here,  we  are  concerned  with 
logical  methods  merely,  this  does  not  matter.  For  the 
justification  of  a  method  it  is  clearly  not  necessary  that  it 
should  spring  directly  from  an  ultimate  analysis  of  the 
phenomena;  it  is  sufficient x  that  the  analysis  should  be  a 
correct  one. 

Now  how  many  possible  relations  are  there,  in  this 
respect  of  mutual  inclusion  and  exclusion,  of  two  classes  to 
one  another  ?  Clearly  only  five.  For  the  question  here,  as 
I  apprehend  it,  is  this : — Given  one  class  as  known  and 
determined  in  respect  of  its  extent,  in  how  many  various 
relations  can  another  class  also  known  and  similarly  deter- 
mined, stand  towards  the  first  ?  Only  in  the  following :  It 
can  coincide  with  the  former,  can  include  it,  be  included  by 


6 


On  the  Forms  of  Logical  Proposition.  CHAP. 


it,  partially  include  and  partially  exclude  it,  or  entirely 
exclude  it.  In  every  recognized  sense  of  the  term  these  are 
distinct  relations,  and  they  seem  to  be  the  only  such  distinct 
relations  which  can  possibly  exist1.  These  five  possible 
arrangements  would  be  represented  diagrammatically  as 
follows : — 


2. 


B. 


Before  comparing  in  detail  the  verbal  statement  of  these 
five  forms  with  that  of  the  four  old  ones,  it  must  be  pointed 
out  how  entirely  the  distinction  between  subject  and  predi- 
cate is  robbed  of  its  significance  on  such  a  scheme  as  this. 
The  terms  of  the  proposition  here  stand  for  two  classes  of 
1  That  these  are  the  only  really  qni  la  composent.  Une  telle  langue 


distinct  forms  of  class  relation  has 
been  repeatedly  recognized  by  logical 
writers.  The  earliest  explicit  state- 
ment of  the  matter  that  I  have  seen  is 
by  Gergonne  (Annales  de  MatMmati- 
ques,  vn.  189).  He  has  gone  very 
fully  into  the  comparison  between  the 
five  diagrammatical  forms,  and  the 
four  common  propositional  ones, 
ascertaining  in  detail  (with  aid  of 
a  peculiar  system  of  notation)  how 
many  of  the  one  set  can  be  considered 
to  correspond  collectively  or  indi- 
vidually to  any  single  form  of  the 
other.  He  also  notices  the  diver- 
gence of  this  scheme  from  the 
common  one:  "II  n'cst  aucune 
langue  connue  dans  laquelle  uno 
proposition  exprime  prtfcisGment  et 
exclusivement  dans  lequcl  de  nos 
cinq  cas  se  trouvent  les  deux  terincs 


si  elle  existait  serait  bien  plus  precise 
que  les  notres :  elle  aurait  cinq  sortes 
de  propositions,  et  sa  dialectique 
serait  toute  diff6rente  de  celle  de  nos 
langues."  F.  A.  Lange  again  (Lo- 
gische  Studien)  has  worked  out  the 
same  view,  emphasizing,  even  more 
strongly  than  I  ha've  done,  the 
radically  distinct  theories  as  to  the 
import  of  propositions  involved  in 
these  two  ways  of  stating  or  repre- 
senting them.  Other  writers,  for 
instance  Twesten  (Logik,  p.  30)  and 
the  author  of  a  little  volume  entitled 
Thoughts  on  Logic,  or  the  S.  N.  L  X. 
Propositiotial  Theory,  reduce  the  five 
forms  to  four,  by  not  distinguishing 
between  (2)  and  (8) ;  in  other  words 
by  supposing  that  we  have  no  means 
of  distinguishing  and  recognizing  one 
of  the  two  classes  from  the  other. 


I.]  On  the  Forms  of  Logical  Proposition.  7 

things  possessing  some  mutual  relation  of  extension,  so  that 
this  distinction  sinks  down  into  one  which  is  purely  gramma- 
tical. It  is  the  merest  accident  which  of  the  two  classes  oc- 
cupies the  first  place  in  our  verbal  statement ;  whether,  for 
instance,  in  (2)  we  say  that  B  lies  partly  outside  A  or  that  A 
lies  inside  B.  Certainly  when  the  diagrammatic  representation 
alone  was  shewn  to  us  no  one  could  give  a  guess  as  to  which 
circle  was  intended  to  stand  for  a  subject  and  which  for  a 
predicate.  He  could  not,  that  is,  read  the  diagram  off  in  one 
way  and  one  way  only,  with  confidence. 

A  very  little  consideration  will  serve  to  convince  us  that 
this  scheme  of  five  forms,  and  the  old  one  of  four,  will  not 
by  any  means  fit  in  accurately  with  one  another.  Con- 
sidering that  they  spring  from  different  interpretations  of  the 
import  of  a  proposition  it  could  not  be  expected  that  they 
should  do  so.  No.  (5)  is  the  one  unambiguous  exception, 
corresponding  precisely  to  the  universal  negative  'No  A 
is  B.'  That  is,  given  ' No  A  is  B'  we  could  only  select  this 
diagram ;  and  conversely,  given  this  diagram  we  could  only 
describe  it  as  '  No  A  is  B'  But  such  correspondence  does 
not  exist  in  any  other  case.  Given  '  All  A  is  B '  we  could 
not  but  hesitate  between  diagrams  (1)  and  (2) ;  and  if 
diagram  No.  (4)  were  chosen  we  should  not  know  whether  to 
describe  it  as  '  Some  A  is  B '  or  '  Some  A  is  not  B,'  for  it 
would  fit  either  equally  well 

Is  there  then  no  precise  and  unambiguous  way  of  de- 
scribing these  five  forms  in  ordinary  speech  ?  There  is  such 
a  way,  and  to  carry  it  out  demands  almost  no  violence  to  the 
usage  of  ordinary  language.  It  is  merely  necessary  to  employ 
the  word  '  some,'  and  to  say  definitely  that  it  shall  signify 
'some,  not  all;'  a  signification  which  on  the  whole  seems 
more  in  accordance  with  popular  usage  than  to  say  with  most 
logicians  that  it  signifies  '  some,  it  may  be  all/  If  we  adopt 


s 


On  the  Forms  of  Logical  Proposition.         [CHAP. 


this  definition  of  the  word  our  five  diagrams  will  be  com- 
pletely, accurately,  and  unambiguously  expressed  by  the  five 
following  verbal  statements  : — 

All  A  is  all  B, 
All  A  is  some  B, 
Some  A  is  all  B, 
Some  A  is  some  B, 
No  A  is  any  B. 

That  is :  given  one  of  these  statements,  only  one  diagram 
could  be  selected  for  it :  and  conversely,  given  any  one 
diagram  it  could  be  matched  with  one  only  of  these  forms  of 
words. 

The  tabular  expression  of  these  five  forms  will  naturally 
recall  to  the  reader's  mind  the  well-known  eight  forms  adopted 
by  Hamilton1,  (Logic  II.  27 /)  viz : — 


1  Hamilton's  name  is  deservedly 
the  best  known  in  connection  with 
this  scheme,  for  the  claim  pat  for- 
ward in  favour  of  Mr  G.  Bentham  on 
the  ground  that  he  had  (Logic,  1827) 
drawn  up  the  same  eightfold  arrange- 
ment, seems  to  me  quite  untenable. 
For  one  thing,  he  had  been  antici- 
pated by  more  than  sixty  years  by 
Lambert,  who  in  1765  drew  up  a  pre- 
cisely similar  table  to  that  which  is 
now  so  familiar  to  us  (Sammlung  der 
Hchriften  welctie  den  Loglschen  Cal- 
cul  Herrn  Prof.  Ploucquet's  betreffen, 
p.  212).  But  in  philosophical  matters 
priority  of  mere  statement  is  surely 
of  but  little  value;  appeal  should 
rather  be  directed  to  the  use  made  of 
a  principle  and  to  the  evidence  of  its 
having  been  clearly  grasped.  Taking 
this  test,  the  merit,  such  as  it  is,  of 


the  Quantification  of  the  Predicate, 
must,  I  should  think,  be  assigned  to 
rioucquet,  and  that  of  the  closely 
connected  doctrine  of  these  eight  pro- 
positional  forms  to  Hamilton.  As 
regards  the  Quantification,  Ploucquet 
freely  uses  the  distinctively  charac- 
teristic forms  'No  A  is  some  /•'.' 
'  Some  A  is  not  some  JB ; '  and  even 
distinguishes  and  directs  attention  to 
the  case  in  which  from  two  proposi- 
tions of  the  form  '  All  A  is  some  S, ' 
'All  C  is  some  B,'  we  can  conclude 
that  'all  A  is  all  C\ '  viz.  when  the 
'some  B'  is  the  same  some  (Methodus 
Calculandl).  He  nowhere  recognizes 
the  appropriate  table  of  consequent 
eight  propositions,  though  he  was 
the  means  of  suggesting  them  to 
Lambert.  As  regards  mere  priority 
of  statement,  it  may  be  remarked  that 


I.]  On  the  Forms  of  Logical  Proposition.  9 

All  A  is  all  B,  Any  A  is  not  any  B, 

All  A  is  some  B,  Any  A  is  not  some  B, 

Some  A  is  all  5,  Some  A  is  not  any  B, 

Some  J.  is  some  B,  Some  J.  is  not  some  B. 

I  might  have  termed  the  view  as  to  the  import  of  propo- 
sitions now  under  discussion  the  Hamiltonian,  instead  of  the 
class  inclusion  and  exclusion  view  ;  and  should  have  done  so 
but  for  the  fact  that  it  is  clearer  and  simpler  to  describe 
a  system  itself  as  one  understands  it,  rather  than  to  begin  by 
giving  what  one  cannot  but  regard  as  an  erroneous  expression 
of  that  system  by  some  one  else.  Moreover  there  are  obvious 
reasons  for  wishing  to  keep  as  free  as  possible  from  a  some- 
what prolonged  and  intricate  controversy.  At  the  same  time, 
I  must  state  my  own  very  decided  opinion  that  the  view  in 
question  is  that  which  Hamilton,  and  those  who  have  more 
or  less  closely  followed  him  in  his  tabular  scheme  of 
propositions,  must  be  considered  unconsciously  to  adopt. 

The  logicians  in  question  do  not  seem  to  me,  indeed, 
to  have  at  all  adequately  realized  the  importance  of  the 
innovation  which  they  were  thus  engaged  in  introducing ; 

another  writer,  Mr  Solly,  (Syllabus  system  of  logic  necessarily  contem- 
of  Logic,  1839, )  had  also  given  a  simi-  plated  all  these,"  both  assertions 
lar  table,  before  the  time  at  which  which  seem  to  me  incorrect,  and  the 
Hamilton,  by  his  own  assignment  of  latter  paradoxical.  (The  reader  in- 
dates,  had  begun  to  publicly  teach  terested  in  this  subject  will  of  course 
this  doctrine.  But  neither  Mr  Ben-  be  acquainted  with  the  controversy 
tham  nor  Mr  Solly  seem  to  me  to  begun  originally  between  Hamilton 
have  understood  exactly  the  sense  in  and  De  Morgan  in  1846 ;  continued 
which  their  scheme  was  to  be  inter-  intermittently  in  the  Athenceum ;  and 
preted,  nor  to  have  attached  any  concluded  in  the  Contemporary  .Re- 
importance  to  it.  Hamilton  main-  view  in  1873.  There  are  several 
tains  that  the  scheme  of  eight  pro-  historic  references  also  in  Hamilton's 
positions  is  not  connected  with  the  Logic,  (II.  298,  and  Prof.  Baynes's 
quantification  doctrine,  adding  indeed  Neiv  Analytic). 
(Discussions,  p.  1G2)  that  "every 


10  On  the  Forms  of  Logical  Proposition.         [CHAP. 

nor,  it  must  be  added,  the  utter  inadequacy  of  the  means 
they  were  adopting  for  carrying  it  out.  What  they  were 
really  at  work  upon  was  not  merely  the  rearrangement,  or 
further  subdivision,  of  old  forms  of  proposition,  but  the  intro- 
duction of  another  way  of  looking  at  and  interpreting  the 
function  of  propositions.  The  moment  we  insist  upon  '  quan- 
tifying '  our  predicate  we  have  to  interpret  our  propositions 
in  respect  of  their  extension,  that  is,  to  regard  them  as 
expressing  something  about  the  known  mutual  relations 
of  two  classes  of  things  to  each  other.  The  view  of  the 
proposition  must  be  shifted  from  that  of  stating  the  relation 
of  subject  and  predicate,  or  of  object  and  attribute,  to  that 
of  stating  the  relation  of  inclusion  and  exclusion  of  two 
classes  to  one  another. 

The  question  therefore  at  once  arises,  How  do  the  eight 
verbal  forms  just  quoted  stand  in  relation  to  the  five  which 
we  have  seen  to  be  in  their  own  way,  exhaustive  ?  As  this  is 
a  very  important  enquiry  towards  a  right  understanding  of 
the  nature  and  functions  of  propositions,  I  shall  make  no 
apology  for  going  somewhat  into  details  respecting  it.  As 
regards  the  first  five  out  of  the  eight,  the  correspondence  is  of 
course  complete,  if  we  understand  that  the  word  '  some '  is  to 
be  understood,  as  here,  to  distinctly  exclude  'all1.'  But  then, 
if  so,  what  account  is  to  be  given  of  the  remaining  three  out 
of  the  eight  ?  Only  one  account,  I  think,  can  be  given. 
They  are  superfluous  or  ambiguous  equivalents  for  one  or 

1  Though    his   language    is   not  are    all   animals."    Logic,   Vol.    n. 

always  free  from  ambiguity  this  is,  p.  283.     The  reader  will  understand 

on  the  whole,  the  sense  I  understand  that  I  am  not  advocating  this  sense 

Hamilton  to  adopt.     Sometimes  he  of  the  word,  but  merely  pointing  out 

is  quite  explicit ;  e.g.  "Affirming  all  that  if  we  propose  to  adopt  a  certain 

men  are  tome  animate,  we  are  entitled  division  of  propositions  this   sense 

to  infer  the  denial  of  the  propositions  will  best  serve  our  purpose  in  the  way 

all  men  are  all  animals,  some  men  of  distinguishing  them. 


I.]  On  the  Forms  of  Logical  Proposition.  11 

more  of  the  first  five.  This  may  need  a  moment's  ex- 
planation. By  calling  the  first  five  complete  and  unam- 
biguous we  mean,  as  already  remarked,  that  if  one  of  these 
propositions  were  uttered,  but  one  form  of  diagram  could  be 
selected  to  correspond  with  it ;  and  conversely,  if  one  of  the 
diagrams  were  pointed  out,  it  could  only  be  referred  to  one 
form  of  verbal  expression.  But  if  we  were  given  one  of  the 
latter  three  to  exhibit  in  a  diagram  we  could  not  with 
certainty  do  so.  Take  for  instance  the  proposition  '  No  A  is 
some  B.'  If  we  proposed  thus  to  exhibit  it  we  should  find 
that  diagrams  (2)  and  (4)  are  equally  appropriate  for  the 
purpose;  whence  this  proposition  is  seen  to  be  ambiguous 
and  superfluous.  Similarly  its  formal  converse  the  proposition 
'  Some  A  is  not  any  B,'  is  equally  fitly  exhibited  in  diagrams 
(3)  and  (4)  and  therefore  appropriately  in  neither.  Conse- 
quently it  also  must  be  regarded  as  needless  in  our  scheme. 
The  case  of  the  remaining  proposition,  '  Some  A  is  not  some 
B'  is  still  worse.  It  is  equally  applicable  to  all  the  first  four 
of  our  five  distinct  possible  cases,  and  therefore,  as  making 
no  distinction  whatever  between  them,  is  almost  entirely 
useless  to  express  the  mutual  relation  of  classes. 

The  ambiguity  affecting  these  three  last  forms  is,  it  need 
hardly  be  remarked,  reciprocal.  That  is,  so  long  as  these 
three  are  retained  in  the  scheme,  we  should  not  know,  on 
a  diagram  being  presented  to  us,  which  proposition  was 
meant  to  be  exhibited;  any  more  than  we  can  draw  the 
diagram  when  a  proposition  is  stated.  Diagram  (3),  for 
instance,  might  under  these  circumstances  be  read  off  indiffe- 
rently as  '  Some  A  is  all  B,' '  Some  A  is  not  any  J9,'  or  '  Some 
A  is  not  some  B' 

It  may  perhaps  be  replied  that  there  is  still  a  use  in 
retaining  forms  of  proposition  which  thus  refer  ambiguously 
to  two  or  more  actual  class  relations,  in  addition  to  those  forms 


12  On  the  Forms  of  Logical  Proposition.         [CHAP. 

which  refer  unambiguously  to  one  only.  It  may  be  urged 
that  if  we  do  not  know  which  of  the  two  is  really  applicable, 
though  one  or  the  other  must  certainly  be  so,  there  is  an 
opening  for  a  form  which  covers  both  of  them.  I  do  not 
think  that  this  will  do.  In  the  first  place  there  is  the 
objection  that  the  employment  of  terms  in  their  extensive 
signification  implies  that  we  are  expressing  their  actual 
relation  to  one  another  in  the  way  of  inclusion  and  exclusion, 
and  not  our  imperfect  knowledge  of  that  relation.  At  any 
rate  this  seems  to  be  so  when  we  make  use  of  diagrams  of 
this  kind,  for  the  circles  must  either  cut  one  another  or  not 
do  so ;  we  cannot  express  a  diagrammatic  doubt  whether  they 
do  or  not.  We  may  feel  a  doubt  whether  they  should  do  so 
or  not,  but  we  must  make  them  do  one  or  the  other. 

An  attempt  is  sometimes  made  in  this  way  by  the  device 
of  marking  a  part  of  one  of  the  circles  with  a  dotted  line 
only.  Thus  'Some  A  is  not  B'  would  be  exhibited  as 
follows : — 


(as,  for  instance,  is  done,  amongst  others,  by  Dr  Thomson  in 
his  Laws  of  Thought).  The  dotted  part  here  represents  of 
course  our  ignorance  or  uncertainty  as  to  whether  the  A  line 
should  lie  partly  inside  B,  or  should  entirely  include  it.  But 
surely,  if  we  are  thus  ignorant  we  have  no  right  to  prejudge 
the  question  by  drawing  one  part  inside,  even  as  a  row  of 
dots.  What  we  ought  to  do  is  to  draw  two  lines,  one  inter- 
secting B  and  the  other  including  it.  Doing  this,  there  is  no 
need  to  dot  them  ;  it  is  simpler  to  draw  at  once  in  the 
ordinary  way  the  two  figures  (3)  and  (4)  above,  and  to  say 
frankly  that  the  common  '  Some  A  is  not  B '  cannot  distin- 


I.]  On  the  Forms  of  Logical  Proposition.  13 

guish  between  them.  In  other  words  this  form  cannot  be 
adequately  represented  by  one  of  these  diagrams ;  it  belongs 
to  another  propositional  theory.  Ueberweg  (Logic,  Trans. 
p.  217),  has  thus  represented  propositions  of  this  kind  by 
alternative  diagrams,  as  well  as  by  a  scheme  of  dotted  lines. 

But  there  is  a  more  conclusive  objection  than  this  last. 
If  we  were  lenient  enough  to  admit  the  three  latter  Hamil- 
tonian  forms  on  such  a  plea  as  the  one  in  question,  we  should 
be  bound  in  consistency  to  let  in  a  good  many  more  upon 
exactly  the  same  grounds.  Take,  for  instance,  the  first  two, 
'  All  A  is  all  Bl  '  All  A  is  some  B!  We  often  do  practically 
want  some  common  form  of  expression  which  shall  cover 
them  both,  and  this  was  excellently  provided  by  the  old  A 
proposition  'All  A  is  B,'  which  just  left  it  uncertain  whether 
the  A  was  all  B,  or  some  B  only.  Perhaps  this  is  indeed  the 
very  commonest  of  all  the  forms  of  assertion  in  ordinary  use. 
Hence  if  once  we  come  to  expressing  uncertainties  or  am- 
biguities we  should  have  to  insist  upon  retaining  this  old  A, 
not  as  a  substitute  for  one  of  the  two  first  Hamiltonian 
forms,  but  in  addition  to  them  both.  Similarly  we  should 
require  a  form  to  cover  the  first  and  the  third.  Or  again, 
whilst  we  are  about  it,  we  might  desire  a  form  to  cover  all  the 
first  four ;  for  we  might  merely  know  (as  indeed  is  often  the 
case)  that  A  and  B  had  some  part,  we  did  not  know  how 
much,  in  common.  What  we  should  want,  in  fact,  would  be 
a  simple  equivalent  for  '  Some  or  all  A  is  some  or  all  B ; '  or, 
otherwise  expressed,  a  form  for  merely  denying  the  truth  of 
'  No  A  is  B.1 

The  Hamiltonian  scheme  has,  no  doubt,  a  specious  look 
of  completeness  and  symmetry  about  it.  Affirmation  and 
denial,  of  some  and  of  all  of  the  subject  and  predicate,  give 
clearly  eight  forms.  But  on  subjecting  them  to  criticism,  by 
enquiring  what  they  really  say,  we  see  that  this  completeness 


14  On  the  Forms  of  Logical  Proposition.         [CHAP. 

is  illusory.  Regard  them  as  expressing  the  relations  of  class 
inclusion  and  exclusion,  (and  this  I  strongly  hold  to  be  the 
right  way  of  regarding  them,  though  quite  aware  that  it  is 
not  the  way  in  which  they  commonly  are  regarded),  and  we 
only  need,  or  can  find  place  for,  five.  Regard  them  as 
expressing  to  some  extent  our  uncertainty  about  these  class 
relations,  and  we  want  more  than  eight.  This  exact  group  of 
eight  seems  merely  the  outcome  of  an  exaggerated  love  of 
verbal  symmetry 1. 

If  indeed  our  choice  lay  simply  between  the  old  group  and 
the  Hamiltonian,  the  old  one  seems  to  me  far  the  soundest 
and  most  useful.  One  or  more  of  those  four  will  express  almost 
all- that  we  can  want  to  express  for  purely  logical  purposes,  and 
as  they  have  their  root  in  the  common  needs  and  expressions 
of  mankind,  they  have  a  knack  of  signifying  just  what  we 
want  to  signify  and  nothing  more.  For  instance,  as  above 
remarked,  we  may  want  to  say  that '  All  A  are  B,'  when  we 
do  not  know  whether  or  not  the  two  terms  are  coextensive  in 
their  application.  The  old  form  just  hit  this  off.  An  obvious 
imperfection  in  the  Hamiltonian  scheme  is  that  with  all  his 
eight  forms  he  cannot  express  this  very  common  and  very 
simple  form  of  doubtful  statement,  by  means  of  a  single 
proposition.  He  can  express  the  less  common  state  of  doubt 

1  De  Morgan  appears  to  have  criticism  of  Hamilton's  view,  is,  I 
entertained  a  similar  view,  for,  after  think,  in  the  article  "Logic"  in  the 
describing  the  five  prepositional  forma  EnglishCycloptedia. — Hamilton  (Dis- 
above,  he  adds  "these  enunciations  cussions,  p.  683)  has  made  an  attempt 
constitute  the  system  at  which  to  represent  his  eight  forms  diagram- 
Hamilton  was  aiming"  (Camb.  Phil.  matically,  on  Lambert's  linear  plan. 
Tr.  i.  439). — This,  and  two  other  He  offers  only  six  diagrams,  and  as 
papers  in  the  same  volume  contain  much  as  admits  that  one  of  these  is 
the  fullest  and  acutest  criticism  of  superfluous.  See  also  his  Logic  (II. 
the  Quantification  doctrine  which  I  277)  where  the  eight  propositions  are 
have  anywhere  seen.  The  best  com-  illustrated  by  four  circular  diagrams, 
pcndious  account  of  his  own  view  and 


I.]  On  the  Forms  of  Logical  Proposition.  15 

between  the  two, '  All  A  is  some  B'  and  ' Some  A  is  some  B,' 
by  one  of  what  I  have  termed  his  superfluous  forms,  viz.,  by 
his  '  Some  ,B  is  not  any  A?  for  it  exactly  covers  them  both. 

So  long  as  we  confine  ourselves  to  the  five  propositions 
which  correspond  to  the  five  distinct  diagrams,  we  are  on  clear 
ground.  These  rest  on  a  tenable  theory  as  to  the  import  of 
propositions  sufficiently  to  give  them  cohesion  and  make  a 
scheme  of  them.  That  theory  is,  as  above  explained,  that 
they  are  meant  to  express  all  the  really  distinct  relations 
of  actual  class  inclusion  and  exclusion  of  two  logical  terms, 
and  none  but  these. 

The  advantages  of  this  form  of  prepositional  statement,  if 
few,  are  at  any  rate  palpable  and  unmistakable.  Each  form 
has  a  corresponding  diagram  which  illustrates  its  exact 
signification  with  the  demonstrative  power  of  an  actual 
experiment.  If  any  sluggish  imagination  did  not  at  once 
realise  that  from  'All  A  is  some  B,'  'No  B  is  any  C,'  we  could 
infer  that  'No  A  is  any  C,'  he  has  only  to  trace  the  circles, 
and  he  sees  it  as  clearly  as  any  one  sees  the  results  of  a 
physical  experiment.  And  most  imaginations,  if  the  truth 
were  told,  are  sluggish  enough  to  avail  themselves  now  and 
then  of  such  a  help  with  advantage. 

But  whilst  this  is  said  it  ought  clearly  to  be  stated  under 
what  restrictions  such  an  appeal  may  fairly  be  made.  The 
common  practice,  adopted  in  so  many  manuals,  of  appealing 
to  these  diagrams, — Eulerian1  diagrams  as  they  are  often 
called, — seems  to  me  very  questionable.  Indeed  when  it  is 
done,  as  it  generally  is  done,  without  a  word  of  caution  as  to  the 
important  distinction  between  the  implied  theories  about  the 
import  of  propositions,  it  seems  to  me  that  there  can  be 
ho  question  as  to  its  being  wrong.  The  old  four  propositions 

1  A  brief  historic  notice  is  given  in  the  concluding  chapter  about  the 
employment  of  diagrams  in  Logic. 


16  On  the  Forms  of  Logical  Proposition.         [CHAP. 

A,  E,  I,  0,  do  not  exactly  correspond  to  the  five  diagrams, 
and  consequently  none  of  the  moods  in  the  syllogism  can  in 
strict  propriety  be  represented  by  these  diagrams1.  We  may 
sometimes  see  Celarent  represented  thus  : — 


But  this  is  too  narrow.  The  Affirmative  represented  here 
is  not  'All  A  is  B,'  but  'All  A  is  some  B'  To  represent 
Celarent  adequately  in  this  way  we  should  have  to  append 
also  the  diagram, 


representing  'All  A  is  all  B,'  'No  B  is  C,'  and  to  say  frankly 
that  we  can  only  know  that  one  of  these  diagrams  will  re- 
present our  syllogism  ;  we  do  not  know  which8. 

Of  course  this  inability  to  represent  each  syllogistic  figure 
by  one  appropriate  diagram  will  not  always  affect  their 
cogency  as  illustrations.  Any  one  can  see  in  the  above 
instance  that  one  diagram  will  practically  take  the  place  of 
the  other ;  and  so  it  would  in  Barbara,  but  not  in  every 
instance,  as  we  shall  presently  shew  more  in  detail.  But 
none  the  less  must  we  remember  that  the  systems  of  pro- 

1  The  rejected  mood  'No  B  is  C,'  answer  is  two-fold.  First,  that  this 

'No  A  is  B,'  with  the  consequent  in-  would  be  tantamount  to  a  rejection 

ability  to  draw  any  conclusion  at  of  this  scheme  of  propositions ;  and 

all,  can  be  thus  exhibited;  because  second,  that  even  so  we  should  not 

the  Universal  Negative  is  the  only  meet  the  case  of  syllogisms  involving 

form  common  to  the  two  schemes.  particular  propositions,  as  the  reader 

•  If  it  be  urged  that  the  upper  will  see  if  he  tries  thus  to  exhibit, 

diagram  is  the  general  one,  including  say,  Disamit.  (See  further  on,  for 

the  lower  as  a  special  case,  the  more  illustration  of  this  point.) 


I.]  On  the  Forms  of  Logical  Proposition.  17 

positions  are  really  based  on  distinct  theories,  and  we  have  con- 
sequently no  right  thus  without  warning  to  use  the  diagrams 
of  one  system  to  represent  the  propositions  and  syllogisms  of 
another. 

What  then  is  the  number  and  nature  of  the  Syllogistic 
Figures,  if  we  may  still  call  them  such,  which  we  should  have 
to  adopt  if  we  adhered  with  strict  consistency  to  this  pro- 
positional  theory  now  under  discussion  ?  The  matter  is 
not  one  of  much  importance  in  itself,  but  it  deserves  con- 
sideration as  serving  to  impress  upon  the  reader  what  are 
the  true  representative  characteristics  of  the  diagrams  with 
whose  appearance  he  is  already  so  familiar ;  and  I  will 
therefore  go  into  it  with  more  detail  than  would  otherwise 
be  needed1. 

As  I  apprehend  the  matter  then  the  problem  of  the  Syllo- 
gism is  this : — Given  three  terms  combined  into  two  propo- 
sitions, how  many  really  distinct  pairs  can  be  made  out  of  them 
which  shall  yield  a  necessary  and  unambiguous  conclusion  ? 
Of  course  this  needs  some  explanation  as  to  what  is  to 
be  considered  really  distinct.  On  this  point  logical  con- 
vention has  decided,  (1)  that  the  order  of  the  premises  is 
at  our  option  and  therefore  affords  no  ground  of  distinction. 
(2)  That  the  difference  between  subject  and  predicate  is 

1  When    the  substance   of    this  p.  475)  has  given  a  table   of  valid 

chapter  -was    first  written    out    for  Syllogistic  Moods  adapted  to  his  own 

Mind  I  was  unable  to  ascertain  that  complete  scheme  of  propositions.    It 

any  attempt  had  been  made  to  re-  is  also  printed  hi  Dr  Thomson's  Laws 

construct  the  syllogistic  figures  upon  of  Thought,  p.  188.    Mr  Ingleby  also 

this  prepositional  scheme.     I  have  (Outlines  of  Logic,  1856),  as  a  dis- 

since  found  that  almost  exactly  the  ciple  of  Hamilton,  has  discussed  the 

same  results  as  are  given  here  had  problem  with  more  fulness,  but  his 

been  already  obtained  by  F.  A.  Lange,  results  are  naturally  widely  different 

in  his  admirable  Logische  Studien,  from  mine,  since  he  too  admits  all  the 

though  from   a   somewhat   different  eight  forms  as  standing  on  an  equal 

point  of  view.     Hamilton  (Logic,  n.  footing. 

V.L.  2 


18  On  the  Forms  of  Logical  Proposition.        [CHAP. 

not  to  be  meddled  with,  and  therefore  does  yield  a  distinction. 
(3)  That  negative  subjects  and  predicates  are  not  to  be  intro- 
duced, the  negation  being  confined  to  the  copula l.  Given  then 
three  terms  X,  Y,  Z,  our  range  of  liberty  extends  to  making 
universal  or  particular,  affirmative  or  negative,  propositions 
out  of  them;  and  then  arranging  them  so  that  the  term 
which  occurs  twice  over,  (the  middle  term),  shall  be 
subject  of  both,  predicate  of  both,  or  subject  of  one  and 
predicate  of  the  other.  This  yields  sixty-four  possibilities, 
from  nineteen  only  of  which  can  a  necessary  conclusion 
be  drawn. 

Take  then  the  properly  corresponding  conditions  for 
the  scheme  now  under  discussion,  and  see  what  we  are 
led  to.  The  very  similarity  of  the  conditions  leads  to 
differences  in  application.  To  begin  with,  we  recognize 
five  forms  of  proposition  instead  of  four,  but  then  in  turn 
we  recognize  no  distinction  between  subject  and  predicate. 
Hence  we  have  only  twenty-five  possible  combinations,  of 
premises,  instead  of  sixty-four  to  submit  to  examination. 
Again  there  is  another  very  important  ground  of  extinction 
arising  out  of  the  fact  (already  adverted  to)  that  on  this  scheme 
'some'  does  not  include  'all/  but  is  incompatible  with  it. 
That  is  to  say  the  two  conclusions  'Some  X  is  Z'  'All  X  is  Z* 
are  not  here  compatible  with  one  another,  but  contradictory. 
These  points  will  come  out  better  in  the  course  of  the 
following  discussion. 

Make  then  an  arrangement  of  all  the  possible  combi- 
nations of  premises  with  a  view  to  determining  how  many  of 
them  will  lead  to  certain  and  unambiguous  conclusions. 

1  The  rejection  of  this  third  con-  predicates,  is  one  of  the  most  marked 
vention,  with  the  consequent  free  in-  characteristics  of  De  Morgan's  Sys- 
troduction  of  negative  subjects  and  tern. 


I.]  On  the  Forms  of  Logical  Proposition.  19 

They  will  stand  as  follows  : — 

I.  II. 

All  Fisall^,  All  X  is  all  F, 

All  F  is  some  Z,  All  X  is  some  F, 

Some  F  is  all  Z,  Some  X  is  all  F, 

Some  F  is  some  Z,  Some  X  is  some  F, 

No  F  is  any  Z.  No^  X  is  any  F. 

Now  combine  each  of  the  first  column  with  each  of  the 
second,  and  take  the  results  in  detail : — 

1.  All  Fis  aU  Z,  All  X  is  all  F.     This  yields  the  con- 
clusion, All  X  is  all  Z.     [See  Figure  (1),  p.  21.] 

2.  All  F  is  all  Z,  All  X  is  some  F.     This  yields  the 
conclusion,  All  X  is  some  Z.     [Fig,  (2.)] 

3.  All  F  is  all  Z,  Some  X  is  all  F    This  yields  the 
conclusion,  Some  X  is  all  Z*     [Fig.  (3.)] 

4.  All  F  is  all  .£,  Some  X  is  some  F.     This  yields  the 
conclusion,  Some  X  is  some  Z.     [Fig.  (4.)] 

5.  All  F  is  all  Z,  No  X  is  any  F.     This  yields  the  con- 
clusion, No  X  is  any  Z.     [Fig.  (5.)] 

6.  All  F  is  some  ^,  All  X  is  all  F.     This  yields  a  valid 
conclusion,  but  may  be  rejected  on  the  ground  that  it  is 
formally  identical  with  No.  (3),  merely  substituting  Z  for  X, 
and  vice  versa. 

7.  All  F  is  some  Z,  All  X  is  some  F.     This  yields  the 
conclusion,  All  X  is  some  Z.     [Fig.  (6.)] 

8.  All  F  is  some  Z,  Some  X  is  all  F.     It  may  seem  as 
if  the  conclusion  that  common  logic  would  draw  '  Some  X  is 
Zl  ought  to  yield  us  something  here.    But  the  peculiar  signi- 
fication of  'some'  forbids  a  conclusion;  for  any  one  of  the 
four   (with   us,   not  merely   distinct  but   mutually  hostile) 
propositions  '  All  X  is  some  Zj  '  Some  X  is  all  Z?  '  All  X  is 
all  Z'  '  Some  X  is  some  Z,'  are  equally  compatible  with  the 
premises.     Hence  no  single  conclusion  is  admissible. 

2—2 


20  On  the  Forms  of  Logical  Proposition.        [CHAP. 

9.  All  F  is  some  Z,  Some  X  is  some  Y.    The  state  of 
things  here  is  similar  to  that  in  the  last  case.     We  reject  the 
syllogism,  on  the  ground  of  its  admitting  of  two  mutually 
inconsistent  conclusions  '  All  X  is  some  Z,'  and  '  Some  X  is 
some  Z' 

10.  All  Y  is  some  Z,  No  X  is  any  Y.     Rejected  on  the 
same  ground  as  the  last  two,  inasmuch  as  it  admits  of  three 
mutually  hostile  conclusions.     Common  logic  agrees  with  us 
in  this  rejection,  because  two  of  the  possible  conclusions,  viz. : 
'  No  X  is  any  Z]  '  Some  X  is  some  Z'  are  also  recognized  by 
it  as  hostile,  whereas  in  cases  (8)  and  (9)  it  recognized  no 
such  hostility. 

11.  Some  Y  is  all  Z,  All  Xis  all  F.     Admissible  in  it- 
self, but  dismissed  on  the  ground  of  its  formal  identity  with  (2). 

12.  Some  Fis  all  Z,  All  X  is  some  F.     Rejected  (as  in 
common  logic)  because  any  of  the  five  possible  conclusions  is 
compatible  with  the  premises. 

13.  Some  Fis  all  Z,  Some  Xis  all  F.     Formally  iden- 
tical with  No.  (7). 

14.  Some  F  is  all  Z,  Some  X  is  some  F.     Rejected  as 
leading  to  three  possible  conclusions.    Common  logic  concurs 
here. 

15.  Some  F  is  all  Z,  No  X  is  any  F.     This  yields  the 
conclusion, '  No  X  is  any  Z.'    [Fig.  (7.)] 

16.  Some  F  is  some  Z,  All  X  is  all  F.     Formally  iden- 
tical with  (4). 

17.  Some  F  is  some  Z,  All  X  is  some  F.     Rejected  as 
leading  to  three  conclusions :  formally  identical  with  (14).   . 

18.  Some   F  is  some  Z,  Some  X  is  all   F.     Common 
logic  would  treat  this  as  Disamis,  with  conclusion  '  Some  A' 
is  Z;'  but  we  have  to  reject  it,  because  we  do  not  know 
whether  the  some  X  is  '  all  Z,'  or  '  some  Zl  which  with  us  are 
conflicting  conclusions.     Formally  identical  with  (9). 


On  the  Forms  of  Logical  Proposition. 


21 


19.  Some  Fis  some  Z,  Some  Xis  some  Y.    Rejected  as 
admitting  of  five  possible  conclusions. 

20.  Some   Y  is  some  Z,  No  X  is  any  Y.     Rejected  as 
admitting  three  conclusions. 

21.  No  Y  is  any  Z,  All  X  is  all  F.     Formally  identical 
with  (5). 

22.  No  Fis  any  Z,  All  X  is  some  Y.    Formally  identical 
with  (15). 

23.  No   Y  is  any  Z,  Some  X  is  all  F.     Common  logic 
would  conclude  '  Some  X  is  not  Zl  but  since  this  proposition 
covers  three  of  our   distinct  forms,  we  have   to  reject  the 
syllogism   as   leading  to   no   certain   conclusion.     Formally 
identical  with  (10). 

24.  No  F  is  any  Z,  Some  X  is  some  F.     This  case  cor- 
responds to  the  last ;  we  reject  it  on  the  same  ground.     It  is 
formally  identical  with  (20). 

25.  No    F  is   any  Z,  No  X  is   any   F.     Rejected   as 
admitting  of  five  possible   conclusions.     Common   logic   of 
course  concurs  in  this  rejection,  since  it  interprets  universal 
negatives  exactly  as  we  do. 

It  will  be  seen  therefore  that  we  should  admit  seven 
forms  or  'moods'  of  syllogism  as  distinct,  and  only  seven. 
They  are  thus  exhibited  in  diagrams : — 

(l)  (2)  (3)  (4) 


22  On  the  Forms  of  Logical  Proposition.         [CHAP. 

A  study  of  these  figures  will,  I  think,  convince  any  one, 
independently  of  detailed  investigation,  that  they  represent 
all  the  ways  in  which  each  of  two  figures,  say  circles,  can 
stand  in  relation  (relation,  that  is,  of  the  five  specified  kinds) 
to  a  third  such  figure,  so  that  their  mutual  relation  to  each 
other  shall  be  unambiguously  (Jetermined  thereby.  And  this 
mediate  and  unambiguous  determination  is  exactly  what 
I  understand  that  the  syllogism  proposes  to  effect. 

So  much  then  for  this  second  scheme  of  propositional 
import  and  arrangement.  In  spite  of  its  merit  of  trans- 
parent clearness  of  illustration  of  a  certain  number  of  forms 
of  statement,  it  is  far  from  answering  our  purpose  as  the 
basis  of  an  extension  of  Logic.  Its  employment  soon  becomes 
cumbrous  and  unsynametrical,  and  possesses  no  flexibility  or 
generality.  Fortunately  there  is  another  mode  of  viewing 
the  proposition,  far  more  powerful  in  its  applications  than 
either  of  those  hitherto  mentioned.  It  is  the  basis  of  the 
system  introduced  by  Boole,  and  could  never  have  been 
invented  by  any  one  who  had  not  a  thorough  grasp  of  those 
mathematical  conceptions  which  Hamilton  unfortunately 
both  lacked  and  despised.  The  fact  seems  to  be  that  the 
moment  we  quit  the  traditional  arrangement  and  enumera- 
tion of  propositions  we  must  call  for  a  far  more  thorough 
revision  than  that  exhibited  on  the  system  just  discussed. 
Any  system  which  merely  exhibits  the  mutual  relations  of 
two  classes  to  one  another  is  not  general  enough.  We  must 
provide  a  place  and  a  notation  for  the  various  combinations 
which  arise  from  considering  three,  four,  or  more  classes ;  in 
fact  we  must  be  prepared  for  a  complete  generalization. 
When  we  do  this  we  shall  soon  see  that  the  whole  way 
of  looking  at  the  question  which  rests  upon  the  mutual 
relation  of  classes,  as  regards  exclusion  and  inclusion,  is 
insufficient.  There  is  a  fatal  cumbrousness  and  want  of 


l].  On  the  Forms  of  Logical  Proposition.  23 

symmetry  about  it  which  renders  it  quite  inappropriate  for 
any  but  the  simplest  cases. 

The  way  of  interpreting  and  arranging  propositions  which 
has  to  be  substituted  for  both  the  preceding  (for  the  purpose 
of  an  extended  Symbolic  Logic),  is  perhaps  best  described  as 
implying  the  occupation  or  non-occupation  of  compartments. 
What  we  here  have  to  do  is  to  conceive,  and  invent  a 
notation  for,  all  the  possible  combinations  which  any  number 
of  class  terms  can  yield  4  and  then  find  some  mode  of  sym- 
bolic expression  which  shall  indicate  which  of  these  various 
compartments  are  -empty  or  occupied,  by  the  implications  in- 
volved in  the  given  propositions.  This  is  not  so  difficult  as  it 
might  sound,  since  the  resources  of  mathematical  notation 
are  quite  competent  to  provide  a  simple  and  effective  symbolic 
language  for  the  purpose.  What  we  can  afford  to  say  about 
this  scheme,  here,  is  of  course  merely  preliminary,  since  many 
questions  will  arise  which  will  demand  discussion  and 
illustration  in  the  following  chapters.  Enough,  however,  may 
easily  be  said  to  bring  out  clearly  its  bearing  on  the  par- 
ticular subject  which  has  just  been  discussed,  viz.  the  number 
of  distinct  forms  of  proposition  which  ought  to  be  recognised. 
The  view  which  is  here  taken  is  still  distinctly  a  class  view 
rather  than  a  predication  view ;  but,  instead  of  regarding  the 
mutual  relation  of  two  or  more  classes  in  the  way  of  inclusion 
and  exclusion,  it  substitutes  a  complete  classification  of  all  the 
sub-divisions  which  can  be  yielded  by  putting  any  number  of 
classes  together,  and  indicates  whether  any  one  or  more  of 
these  classes  is  occupied ;  that  is,  whether  things  exist  which 
possess  the  particular  combination  of  attributes  in  question. 

A  fair  idea  of  the  meaning,  scope  and  power  of  this 
system  will  be  gained  if  we  begin  with  two  class  terms  X 
and  Y,  and  consider  the  simple  cases  yielded  by  their 
combination. 


24  On  the  Forms  of  Logical  Proposition.        [CHAP. 

It  is  clear  that  we  are  thus  furnished  with  four  possible 
cases,  or  compartments,  as  we  shall  often  find  it  convenient  to 
designate  them ;  for  everything  which  exists  must  certainly 


possess  both  the  attributes  marked  by  X  and  Y,  or  neither  of 
them,  or  one  and  not  the  other.  This  is  the  range  of  possi- 
bilities, from  which  that  of  actualities  may  fall  short ;  and 
the  difference  between  these  two  ranges  is  just  what  it  is  the 
function  of  the  proposition  to  indicate.  We  will  confine  our- 
selves at  present  to  intimations  that  such  and  such  compart- 
ments are  empty,  since  this  happens  to  be  the  simplest  alter- 
native. Now  how  many  distinct  cases  does  this  system 
naturally  afford  ? — we  must  approach  it,  let  us  remember, 
without  any  prepossessions  derived  from  the  customary  divi- 
sions and  arrangements. 

We  should  naturally  be  led,  I  think,  to  distinguish  fifteen 
different  cases  on  such  a  system  as  this,  which  would  fall 
into  four  groups..  For  there  may  be  one  compartment  unoc- 
cupied, which  yields  four  cases ;  or  two  unoccupied,  which 
yields  six  cases;  or  three  unoccupied,  which  yields  again  four 
cases ;  or  none  unoccupied,  which  yields  but  one  case.  All 
cannot  be  unoccupied,  of  course,  for  we  cannot  deny  both  the 
existence  and  the  non-existence  of  a  thing ;  or,  to  express  it 
more  appropriately  on  this  scheme,  given  that  a  thing  exists 
it  must  be  put  somewhere  or  other  in  our  all-comprehensive 
scheme  of  possibilities. 

As  this  whole  scheme  will  be  thoroughly  worked  out  in 
future  chapters,  I  will  only  call  attention  here  to  the  nature 
of  the  four  simplest  out  of  these  fifteen  cases.  Writing,  for 


I-]  On  the  Forms  of  Logical  Proposition.  25 

simplicity,  x  for  notxc  and  y  for  not-y,  these  four  would  be 
thus  represented : — 

xy  —  0,  or  No  x  is  y, 
xy  =  0,  or  All  y  is  ar, 
xy  =  0,  or  All  x  is  y, 
#y  =  0,  or  Everything  is  either  x  or  y. 

On  this  plan  of  notation  xy  stands  for  the  compartment, 
or  class,  of  things  which  are  both  x  and  y  ;  and  the  equation 
xy  =  0  expresses  the  fact  that  that  compartment  is  unoc- 
cupied, that  there  is  no  such  class  of  things.  And  similarly 
with  the  other  sets  of  symbols. 

A  moment's  glance  will  convince  the  reader  how  entirely 
distinct  the  group  of  elementary  propositions  thus  obtained  is 
from  that  yielded  by  either  of  the  other  two  schemes; 
though,  starting  from  its  own  grounds,  it  is  just  as  simple 
and  natural  as  either  of  them.  One  of  these  four  is  of  course 
the  universal  negative,  which  presents  itself  as  fundamental 
on  all  the  three  schemes.  Two  others  are  universal  affir- 
matives, but  with  the  subject  and  predicate  converted.  But 
the  fourth  is  significant,  as  reminding  us  how  completely 
relative  is  the  comparative  simplicity  of  a  prepositional  form. 
On  the  present  scheme  this  is  just  as  simple  as  any  of  the 
others ;  but  in  the  traditional  arrangement  it  would  probably 
obtain  admittance  only  as  a  disjunctive,  since  that  arrange- 
ment hates  the  double  negation  'No  not-o;  is  not-y'  and  does 
not  like  even  the  simpler  'All  not-#  is  y.'  Indeed  on 
hardly  any  other  view  could  such  a  verbal  statement  as 
this  last  be  considered  as  elementary,  since  almost  every  one 
would  have  to  put  it  into  other  words  before  clearly  under- 
standing its  import. 

We  might  easily  go  through  the  eleven  remaining  cases 
referred  to  above,  but  to  do  so  would  be  an  anticipation  of 


26  On  tlie  Forms  of  Logical  Proposition.        [CHAP. 

future  chapters.  It  may  just  be  noticed,  however,  in  passing, 
that  the  emptying  out  (as  we  may  term  it)  of  two  compart- 
ments does  not  necessarily  give  a  proposition  demanding 
a  greater  amount  of  verbal  statement  than  that  of  one  only 
does.  For  instance  the  combination  xy  =  Q,xy  =  0,  expresses 
the  coincidence  of  the  two  classes  #  and  y\  it  is  '  All  x  is  all  y? 
That  of  xy  and  xy  yields  the  statement  that  x  and  y  are 
the  'contradictory  opposites  of  one  another,  that  x  and 
not-?/  ape  the  same  thing,  and  consequently  y  and  noi-x. 
These  and  other  results  of  this  system  will  call  for  attention 
hereafter. 

The  full  merits  of  this  way  of  regarding  and  expressing 
the  logical  proposition  are  not  very  obvious  when  only  two 
terms  are  introduced,  but  it  will  readily  be  seen  that  some 
such  method  is  indispensable  if  many  terms  are  to  be  taken 
into  account.  Let  us  introduce  three  terms,  x,  y  and  z ;  and 
suppose  we  want  to  express  the  fact  that  there  is  nothing  in  ex- 
istence which  combines  the  properties  of  all  these  three  terms, 
t-hat  is  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  xyz.  If  we  had  to  put 
this  into  the  old  forms  we  should  find  ourselves  confronted  with 
six  alternative  statements,  all  of  tfeem  tainted  with  the  flaw  of 
UHsymmetry ;  viz.  No  x  is  yz,  No  y  is  xz,  No  z  is  xy,  and 
ako  the  three  converse  forms  of  these.  No  reason  could  be 
shown  for  selecting  one  rather  than  another  of  them ;  and  if 
we  attempted  to  work  with  the  symmetrical  form  '  There  is 
no  xyz,'  we  should  find  that  we  had  no  supply  of  rules  at  hand 
to  connect  it  with  propositions  which  had  only  x,  y,  or  z,  for 
subject  or  predicate. 

If  we  tried  the  second  prepositional  theory  we  should 
only  reduce  the  above  six  Jimsymmetrical  alternatives  to 
three ;  three  being  got  rid  of  by  our  refusing  to  recognize 
that  conversion  makes  any  difference  in  the  proposition.  But 
the  same  inherent  vice  of  a  choice  of  unsymmetrical  alterna- 


I.]  On  the  Forms  of  Logical  Proposition.  27 

tives  would  still  confront  us.  No  reason  could  be  given  why 
we  should  say  that  the  class  x  excludes  the  class  yz, 
rather  than  that  the  class  y  excludes  that  of  xz,  -or  z  that  of 
xy.  Common  language  may  be  perfectly  right  in  tolerating 
such  alternatives ;  but  a  sound  symbolic  method  ought  to  be 
naturally  cast  in  a  symmetrical  form  if  it  is  not  to  break 
down  under  the  strain  imposed  by  having  to  work  with  three 
or  more  terms.  This  requires  us  to  avoid  such  forms  as  '  the 
class  x  excludes  that  of  yz'  as  well  as  all  the  statements 
of  the  common  Logic,  and  to  put  what  we  have  to  express 
into  the  symbolic  shape  xyz  =  0.  The  verbal  equivalents  for 
this  are,  of  course,  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  xyz,  or  that 
the  compartment  which  we  denote  by  xyz  is  empty.  There 
are  theoretical  reasons  for  regarding  the  latter  form  as  the 
most  rigidly  accurate  and  consistent. 

It  deserves  notice  that  ordinary  language  does  oc- 
casionally recognize  the  advisability  of  using  symmetrical  ex- 
pressions of  this  kind,  though  the  common  Logic  shows  no 
fondness  for  them.  "We  should  as  naturally  say,  for  example, 
that  '  cheapness,  beauty  and  durability  never  go  together,'  or 
that  '  nothing  is  at  once  cheap,  beautiful,  and  durable,'  as  we 
should  use  one  of  the  forms  which  divide  these  three  terms 
between  the  subject  and  the  predicate.  But  this  latter  plan 
is  what  would  be  adopted  presumably  by  the  strict  logician, 
by  his  arranging  it  in  some  such  form  as  '  no  cheap  things  are 
beautiful-durable.'  It  need  not  be  remarked  that  popu- 
lar language,  though  occasionally  making  use  of  such  sym- 
metrical forms,  has  never  hit  upon  any  general  scheme  for 
their  expression,  and  would  be  sadly  at  a  loss  to  work  upon 
more  complicated  materials.  Especially  would  this  be  the 
case  where  negative  predicates  or  attributes  had  to  be  taken 
into  account  as  well  as  positive.  However  what  we  are  here 
concerned  with  is  the  insufficiency  of  the  ordinary  logical 


28  On  the  Forms  of  Logical  Proposition.        [CHAP. 

view  rather  than  the  occasional  ingenuity  of  popular  ex- 
pression. 

In  these  remarks  I  have  endeavoured  to  keep  rather 
closely  to  the  enquiry  suggested  at  the  outset ;  that,  namely, 
of  the  number  of  fundamentally  distinct  logical  forms,  and 
the  foundation  on  which  each  different  arrangement  must  be 
understood  to  rest.  It  seems  quite  clear  that  no  attempt 
can  be  made  to  answer  this  question  until  we  have  decided, 
in  a  preliminary  way,  what  view  we  propose  to  take  of 
the  proposition  and  its  nature.  There  is  no  occasion  what- 
ever to  tie  ourselves  down  to  one  view  only,  as  if  the  import 
of  propositions  were  fixed  and  invariable.  Very  likely  other 
views  might  be  introduced  in  addition  to  the  three  which 
have  been  thus  examined,  though  these  appear  to  me  to 
be  the  only  ones  with  which  the  student  is  likely  to  have  to 
make  much  acquaintance. 

Each  of  the  three  stands  upon  its  own  basis,  yields  its 
appropriate  number  of  fundamentally  distinct  propositions, 
and  possesses  its  own  merits  and  defects.  The  old  view 
has  plenty  to  say  for  itself,  and  for  ordinary  educational 
purposes  will  probably  never  be  superseded.  It  is  very 
simple,  it  is  in  close  relation  with  popular  language,  and 
it  possesses  a  fine  heritage  of  accurate  technical  terms  and 
rules  of  application.  Its  defects  seem  to  me  to  be  principally 
these  : — that  it  does  not  yield  itself  to  any  accurately  corre- 
spondent diagrammatic  system  of  illustration;  and  that  its  want 
of  symmetry  forbids  its  successful  extension  and  generalization. 

The  great  merit  of  the  second  plan,  or  that  of  class  in- 
clusion and  exclusion,  is  its  transparent  clearness  of  illustra- 
tion. We  may  be  said  thus  to  intuite1  the  proposition.  This 

1  F.  A.  Lange  (Logischc  Studien  logical  axioms  exactly  as  they  do  in 
p.  9)  maintains  that  such  intuitions  the  case  of  our  mathematical  axioms, 
of  apace  lie  at  the  bottom  of  our 


I.]  On  the  Forms  of  Logical  Proposition.  29 

has  indeed  caused  a  most  unwarranted  amount  of  employment 
of  its  diagrams  by  those  who  do  not  realize  that  its  five 
distinct  forms  of  proposition  cannot  be  properly  fitted  in 
with  the  four  of  the  traditional  scheme.  This  clearness 
is  however  almost  its  only  merit.  It  possesses  little  more 
of  symmetry,  or  consequent  adaptability  to  generalization, 
than  the  former,  and  it  is  considerably  removed  from  popular 
forms  of  expression.  I  regard  it  in  fact  as  a  sort  of  logical 
blind  alley,  inasmuch  as  it  does  not  seem  to  lead  out  any- 
where further,  that  is,  not  to  admit  of  any  generalization. 
Above  all,  as  it  insists  upon  exhibiting  the  actual  relations  of 
the  two  classes  to  one  another,  it  has  no  power  to  express 
that  degree  of  ignorance  about  these  relations  which  many 
propositions  are  bound  to  do,  if  they  are  to  state  all  that 
we  know,  and  nothing  but  what  we  know,  about  the  relation 
of  the  subject  and  predicate  to  each  other.  (Hamilton's 
eight  propositions  seem  to  me  an  inconsistent  and  partial 
attempt  to  remedy  this  latter  defect,  in  so  far  as  the  last  three 
of  his  forms  are  concerned.) 

Ths  third  scheme  is,  of  course,  in  comparison  with  the 
others,  an  artificial  one,  and  possesses  the  merits  and  defects 
which  might  be  expected  in  consequence.  It  is  couched 
in  too  technical  forms,  and  is  too  far  removed  from  the 
language  of  common  life,  for  it  ever  to  become  a  serious 
rival  of  the  traditional  scheme  on  the  ground  appropriate 
to  this  latter.  For  symmetry,  however,  and  the  power  which 
comes  of  symmetry,  nothing  can  for  a  moment  be  put  into 
competition  with  it,  as  will  abundantly  appear  in  the  course 
of  the  following  chapters. 

The  following  comparative  table  will  aid  the  reader  in 
keeping  in  mind  the  distinctions  insisted  on  in  the  course  of 
this  chapter. 

In  the  first  column  the  five  possible  distinct  objective  class 


30  On  the  Forms  of  Logical  Proposition.        [CHAP. 

relations  are  exhibited.  In  the  second  column  stand  the 
groups  of  ordinary  propositions  requisite  for  the  purpose  of 
unambiguously  expressing  these  relations.  In  the  third,  we 


(i)  Diagrammatic 

(ii)  Common  Logic 

(iii)  Quantified 

(iv)  Sym- 
bolic 

© 

All  A  is  Jl\ 
All  B  is  A] 

All  ^  is  all  B 

AB  =  Q\ 
AB=Q) 

© 

All  ^  is  B  1 
Some  J?  is  not  A  J 

All  .4  is  some  B 

AB  =  Q] 

0 

All  5  is  ^  V 
Some  J.  is  not  Bj 

Some  -4  is  all  B 

If:!} 

OS 

Some  A  is  7?  \ 
Some  -4  is  not  B\ 
Some  7?  is  not  A] 

Some  A  is  some  B 

53 

00 

No  .4  is  5 

No  .4  is  any  B 

"-« 

express  these  relations  by  single  propositions  with  quantified 
predicates,  and  a  special  interpretation  of  'some'  In  the  fourth 
we  represent  them  symbolically.  (As  regards  the  signification 
of  the  letter  v  I  am  anticipating  here.  As  will  be  shown  in 
chap.  VIL,  AB  =  v  means  'There  is  A  which  is  not  B,'  or  'AB 
is  something,'  i.e.  is  neither  0  nor  1.) 

In  the  above  arrangement  the  last  three  columns  are 
forced  into  following  the  lead  of  the  first.  To  see  into  what 
.shape  they  will  throw  themselves  when  this  pressure  is 
removed,  I  add  another  arrangement ;  in  which  they,  so  to  say, 
think  of  nothing  but  following  out  their  own  bent  and  framing 


I.]  On  the  Forms  of  Logical  Proposition.  31 

themselves  as  simply  and  symmetrically  as  possible.  In  this 
case  the  second  column  contracts  into  the  familiar  four 
propositions ;  the  third,  when  regarded  as  consisting  of  verbal 
statements  unchecked  by  diagrams,  shows  a  decided  inclina- 
tion towards  mere  grammatical  symmetry,  and  will  tend  to. 
spread  out  into  Hamilton's  (redundant)  eight-fold  scheme ; 
whilst  the  last  yields  its  own  compendious  table  to  be  ex- 
plained in  a  future  chapter. 

IT.  Ill,  IV. 

Alibis  all  B.  xy  =  Q,v,l. 

All  A  is  B.  All  A  is  some  B.  xy  =  0,  v,  1. 

Some  A  is  B.  Some  A  is  all  B.  xy  =  Q,v,l. 

Some  A  is  not  B.  Some  A  is  some  B.  xy  =  Q,v,l. 

No  A  is  B^  No  A  is  any  B. 

No  A  is  some  B. 

Some  A  is  not  any  B. 

Some  A  is  not  some  B. 


CHAPTER  II. 

SYMBOLS  OF  CLASSES  AND  OF  OPERATIONS. 

IN  Symbolic  Logic  we  are  concerned  with  two  kinds  of 
symbols,  which  are  commonly  described  as  standing  respec- 
tively for  classes  and  for  operations.  It  should  be  remarked, 
however,  that  these  two  kinds  cannot  be  very  sharply  dis- 
tinguished from  one  another,  inasmuch  as  each  to  some 
extent  implies  the  other.  Thus  a  class  may  be  almost 
always  described  as  the  result  of  an  operation,  namely  of  an 
operation  of  selection.  The  individuals  which  compose  the 
class  have  been  somehow  taken  from  amongst  others,  or  they 
would  not  be  conceived  as  being  grouped  together  into  what 
we  call  a  class.  Similarly  what  we  call  operations  always 
result  in  classes ;  at  least  all  the  operations  with  which  we 
are  here  concerned  will  be  found  to  do  so.  The  mere  signs  of 
operations  never  occur  by  themselves,  but  only  in  their  appli- 
cations, so  that  practically  we  never  encounter  them  except 
as  yielding  a  class,  and  in  fact  almost  indistinguishably 
merged  into  a  class1.  For  purposes  of  exposition,  however,  it 

1  Popular  usage  does  not  seem  sec  expressed  are  not  operations  but 

perfectly  clear  upon  this  point  even  results  of  operations.  Thus  *J$  stands 

in  mathematics,  since  it  is  frequently  for  a  number  pure  and  simple,  that 

overlooked  that  what  we  commonly  is,  for  the  number  which  when  squared 


CHAP.  II.]    Symbols  of  classes  and  of  operations.  33 

will  be  necessary  to  make  the  distinction,  since  those  logical 
operations  by  which  classes  are  governed,  and  which  we  shall 
presently  discuss,  being  less  familiar  to  the  reader  than  the 
direct  symbols  for  simple  classes,  will  demand  far  the  greater 
share  of  our  attention. 

The  former  kind  of  symbols,  namely  those  which  stand  for 
classes  of  things,  need  occupy  us  but  a  very  brief  space  here, 
since  we  may  presume  that  the  reader  has  already  become 
familiar  with  them  elsewhere.  Nothing  is  more  usual  than 
to  put  such  general  symbols  as  X  and  Y  in  place  of  the  con- 
crete subjects  and  predicates  of  our  propositions.  In  fact  it  is 
necessary  to  do  this  when  we  wish  to  judge  of  any  kind  of 
general  rule  upon  its  merits,  and  to  keep  clear  of  individual 
circumstances  and  of  misleading  associations.  Hence  we 
adopt  the  practice  of  putting  single  letters  to  stand  for  whole 
classes  of  individuals,  in  other  sciences,  as  in  stating  Law 
cases,  and  indeed  in  some  of  the  circumstances  of  ordinary 
life. 

What  indeed  the  logical  student  may  have  to  do  in  this 
direction  is  not  so  much  to  acquire  new  associations  as  to 
divest  himself  temporarily  of  some  old  ones.  For  instance  we 
have,  strictly  speaking,  no  concern  whatever  within  the  limits 
of  our  enquiry  with  such  distinctions  as  those  between  deno- 
tation and  connotation,  between  essential  and  accidental 
attributes,  or  even  with  that  between  subject  and  predicate. 
Not  of  course  that  we  would  for  a  moment  imply  that  such 

will  yield  2.    We  imply  this  when  we  x     . 

is-    ...  .       ,  stand  xy,   -,  &c.    strictly  to  denote 

say  */2  =  1 .  41...,  for  of  course  we  "  y 

could  not  equate  an  operation  to  a  mere  classes,  but  to  indicate  by  their 

numerical  result.     That  ia,   ^2  de-  form  the  nature  of  the  operation  by 

notes   a  mere  number  but  indicates  which  the  classes  in  question  are  to 

at  the  same  time  the  operation  by  be  justified  or  obtained,  as  described 

which  that  number  is  justified.    Ex-  in  the  course  of  this  and  the  following 

actly  so  in  Logic.    We  must  under-  chapter. 

V.  L.  3 


34  Symbols  of  classes  and  of  operations.        [CHAP. 

distinctions  as  these  are  unimportant.  Quite  the  reverse ; 
the  study  of  them  furnishes  decidedly  the  most  valuable  edu- 
cational advantage  to  be  derived  from  the  Common  Logic. 
We  omit  them  solely  in  order  to  keep  our  own  Science 
homogeneous  and  symmetrical.  I  wish  to  insist  upon  this 
point  strongly  because  it  has  been  so  much  overlooked. 
Symbolic  Logic  is  not  a  generalization  of  the  Common  Logic 
in  all  directions  alike.  It  confines  itself  to  one  side  of  it,  viz. 
the  class  or  denotation  side, — probably  the  only  side  which 
admits  of  much  generalization, — and  this  if  pushes  to  the 
utmost  limits,  withdrawing  attention  from  everything  which 
does  not  develope  in  this  direction.  Moreover,  inasmuch  as 
it  is  a  purely  Formal  Science,  the  resolve  to  fit  it  in  with  the 
problems  of  Induction,  or  to  regard  it  as  an  introduction  to 
the  Principles  of  Science  in  general,  seems  to  me  a  grave 
error,  and  to  result  merely  in  the  attempt  to  combine  hetero- 
geneous materials. 

We  shall  find  it  convenient  therefore  to  say  that  we 
regard  the  literal  symbols,  x,  y,  z,  &c.,  as  standing  simply  for 
classes  of  individuals,  no  matter  how  these  classes  are  deter- 
mined. For  instance,  it  is  of  no  consequence,  for  our  purposes, 
whether  the  things  which  we  select  to  denote  by  x  and  y  are 
actually  marked  out  to  us  by  a  substantive  or  an  adjective  ; 
by  reference  to  their  essential  or  their  accidental  attributes  ; 
by  a  general  connotative  term,  by  a  merely  denotative  term,  or 
by  some  purely  arbitrary  selection  of  a  number  of  individuals. 
Of  course,  such  classes  must  be  somehow  distinguished  or 
distinguishable  from  others,  or  the  symbols  would  not  be 
significant.  If  I  am  to  make  use  of  the  terms  x  and  y  to  any 
purpose,  I  must  obviously  have  some  means  of  making  it 
clear  to  myself  and  to  others  which  things  are  x  and  which 
are  not,  which  are  y  and  which  are  not.  But  all  discussion  as 
to  how  this  is  done,  and  all  analysis  of  the  grounds  and 


II.]  Symbols  of  classes  and  of  operations.  35 

processes  of  doing  it,  deeply  interesting  as  such  discussions 
are  when  philosophically  regarded,  must  just  now  be  relegated 
to  Common  Logic,  to  Grammar,  or  to  Psychology.  With 
us,  a;  and  y  regarded  as  class  terms  must  be  considered  as 
having  mere  denotation,  as  standing  for  certain  assignable 
individuals  or  groups  of  individuals1. 

Suppose,  for  instance,  I  make  the  assertion,  "  The  Philo- 
sophical writers  whom  I  have  in  view  are  the  a  posteriori 
school,  the  first  editor  of  the  Edinburgh  Review,  and  the 
Mills."  Here  I  have  occasion  to  allude  to  four  classes,  as  we 
may  term  them.  The  first  is  indicated  by  a  many-worded 
term  'the  philosophical  writers  whom  I  have  in  view.'  The  class 
here,  it  will  be  observed,  is  partly  determined  by  the  connota- 
tive  terms  '  philosophical  writers/  but  these  are  identified  in 
some  way  known  perhaps  only  to  myself ;  for  possibly  no  one 
else  may  at  the  moment  know  how  I  recognize  or  keep  in 
mind  this  group,  or  what  are  the  common  characteristics 
which  I  detect  throughout  it.  When  therefore  I  put  a  sym- 
bol, say  w,  to  represent  this  many-worded  term,  such  symbol 
does  not  exactly  correspond  to  any  distinct  kind  of  class  term 
recognized  in  Logic.  Again,  as  regards  "the  a  posteriori 
school" ;  here  we  have  a  connotative  general  name  of  the 
familiar  kind ;  this  we  equally  represent  by  a  symbol,  say  x. 
"  The  first  editor  of  the  Edinburgh  "  is  partly  a  mere  proper 
name,  partly  connotative,  partly  limited  arithmetically.  And 

1  The  above  account  will  do  as  a  are   actual  existent  members  of  it. 

preliminary  one,  but  the  reader  will  Secondly  the  ordinary  conception  of 

find  in  the  sequel  that  it  needs  modi-  a  class,  as  consisting  of  a  plurality  of 

fication  or  enlargement  in  two  re-  individuals,  will  need  enlargement ; 

spects.    First  (as  explained  in  ch.  vi.)  it  must  cover  the  case,  e.g.  of  the 

it  is  imperatively  necessary  to  regard  truth  or  falsity  of  a  single  proposition, 

these  classes  as  hypothetical,  i.  e.  to  amongst  other  things  (this  is  explain- 

lay  it  down  that  the  employment  of  a  ed  in  ch.  xvin.). 
class  term  does  not  imply  that  there 

3-2 


36 


Symbols  of  classes  and  of  operations.        [CHAP. 


finally  "  the  two  Mills  "  is  purely  denotative,  the  class  being 
marked  out  by  a  proper  name  only.  But  on  our  system  all 
these  important  distinctions  have  to  be  let  drop  out  of  sight. 
The  classes,  whether  plural  or  individual,  are  all  alike  re- 
presented denotatively  by  literal  symbols,  w,  x,  y,  z ;  and 
accordingly  we  equate  (as  will  presently  be  explained)  the 
first  group  and  the  last  three.  We  express  the  given  state- 
ment in  some  such  form1  as  w  =  x  +  y  +  z. 

So  much  then  at  present  as  regards  symbols  of  classes. 
We  must  now  turn  to  consider  the  symbols  of  operations2.  In 
other  words,  given  that  we  have  got  our  classes  thus  designa- 
ted before  us,  in  what  various  relations  can  they  be  supposed 
to  stand  towards  one  another  ?  How  can  they  be  combined 


or  otherwise  worked  upon  ? 

1  Prof.  Jevons  has  endeavoured  to 
work  out  a  symbolic  system  of  Logic 
in  which  the  symbols  are  to  stand  for 
the  meaning  of  the  terms  and  not  for 
their  extension.  Amongst  other  evils 
of  such  a  plan  it  leads  up  to  the 
catastrophe  of  having  to  maintain 
"that  the  old  distinction  of  couno- 
tative  and  non-connotative  names  is 
wholly  erroneous  and  unfounded," 
and  that  "singular,  proper,  or  so- 
called  non-connotative  terms,  are 
more  fall  of  connotation  or  meaning 
in  intent  or  quality  than  others,  in- 
stead of  being  devoid  of  such  mean- 
ing." (Pure  Logic,  p.  6.)  It  is  really 
impossible  to  carry  out  such  a  view 
as  this;  'particular  propositions,' 
(with  which  however  we  fortunately 
have  but  little  to  do)  simply  refusing 
in  many  cases  to  be  interpreted  other- 
wise than  in  extension,  and  violence 
l>eing  demanded  thus  to  interpret  uni- 
versal propositions  when  'accidental* 


F.  A.  Lange  (Logische  Studien,  p.  56), 
has  spoken  of  the  "  heilloseste  Yer- 
wirrung"  which  has  been  introduced 
in  this  part  of  the  subject  since 
the  old  scholastic  logic  of  com- 
prehension began  to  give  way,  but 
inconsistently,  to  a  logic  of  extension. 
This  latter  he  considers  to  be  essen- 
tially the  modern  view ;  it  is  certainly 
the  view  we  must  take  in  the  gene- 
ralized Symbolic  Logic. 

11  The  introduction  of  these  sym- 
bols marks  the  real  turning  point  in 
Symbolic  Logic.  The  distinction 
was  long  ago  noted  by  Leibnitz,  and 
by  Lambert.  The  latter  \Neties  Or- 
ganon,  n.  2G,  27)  distinguishes  be- 
tween "Zeichen  der  Beyrille",  and 
the  "  Verbindungskunst  der  Zeichen." 
He  admits  not  having  (in  that  work) 
carried  out  the  latter,  but  having  used 
Ic  tters  to  express  concepts,  and  words 
to  express  their  conditions  and  rela- 
tions. 


II.]  Symbols  of  classes  and  of  operations.  37 

There  would  appear  to  be  three  distinct  modes  in  which 
we  might  approach  the  consideration  of  this  part  of  the 
subject.  (1)  We  might  resolve  to  take,  as  our  starting 
point,  the  ordinary  forms  of  language;  either  in  their  rude 
shape  as  exemplified  in  common  speech,  or  as  they  appear 
after  they  have  been  shaped  by  the  logician ;  and  enquire 
what  divisions  and  arrangements  these  naturally  suggest.  Or, 
(2)  we  might  start  by  borrowing  a  set  of  symbols  which  have 
been  already  adopted  in  another  science  (say  mathematics), 
and,  taking  these  provisionally  as  the  basis  of  our  arrange- 
ment, see  whether  we  could  conveniently,  by  analogy  or 
generalization,  extract  any  sort  of  logical  interpretation  out 
of  them.  Or,  (3)  we  might  resolve  to  start  anew  for  our- 
selves, by  ascertaining  what  are  the  really  distinct  processes, 
in  the  way  of  mutual  relations  of  classes,  which  we 
actually  have  occasion  to  employ  in  thinking  and  reason- 
ing- 
There  appear  to  be  strong  objections  to 'the  two  former 
plans.  The  first,  which  might  seem  in  some  respects  the 
most  natural,  is  rendered  impracticable  by  the  extreme  laxity 
and  consequent  confusion  of  popular  language  on  almost 
every  point  where  logical  distinctions  are  involved.  Such 
characteristics  of  language  are  intelligible  enough  when  we 
remember  its  historic  development,  and  the  varied  purposes 
which  it  has  to  fulfil  besides  that  of  mere  logical  predication. 
But  they  naturally  interpose  serious  difficulties  across  the 
path  of  the  logician.  If  we  attempt  to  carry  out  a  scientific 
arrangement  of  valid  and  distinct  meanings  by  examining 
the  various  phrases  through  the  medium  of  which  our 
meanings  are  popularly  expressed,  we  shall  find  that  we  have 
chosen  a  very  troublesome  path.  Nor  have  we  had  as  much 
aid  from  the  ordinary  logician  here  as  we  might  have  fairly 
expected.  Several  technical  points  of  importance, — of  which 


38  Symbols  of  classes  and  of  operations.         [CHAP. 

one,  viz.  the  mutual  exclusiveness  or  otherwise  of  alternatives, 
will  almost  immediately  come  under  our  notice, — could  be 
mentioned,  upon  which  either  the  logician  has  no  settled 
convictions  of  his  own,  or,  if  he  does  entertain  any,  he  has 
scarcely  made  any  serious  attempt  to  guide  and  establish 
popular  usage  into  accordance  with  them. 

The  objection  to  the  second  course,  indicated  above,  is 
that  it  is  not  strictly  a  logical  one.  We  do  not  want  here  to 
concern  ourselves  with  mathematical  relations  and  symbols, 
jit  least  not  primarily,  but  with  logical  relations  and  their 
appropriate  symbolic  representations.  Doubtless  we  shall 
soon  find  that  the  symbolic  statement  of  the  latter  kind 
of  relation  may  be  conveniently  carried  out  by  the  use  of 
symbols  borrowed  from  mathematics.  But  this  is  a  very  dif- 
ferent thing  from  starting  with  these,  and  trusting  to  being 
able  to  put  some  logical  interpretation  upon,  say,  plus 
and  minus,  or  upon  the  signs  indicative  of  multiplication  and 
division. 

The  course  therefore  which  it  is  here  proposed  to  adopt, 
is  the  following.  We  shall  begin  by  examining  successively 
the  principal  really  distinct  ways  in  which  classes  or  class 
terms  practically  have  to  be  combined  with  one  another  for 
logical  purposes.  We  shall  then  proceed  to  discuss  in  each 
case  the  various  words  and  phrases  which  are  popularly 
employed  to  express  these  combinations,  enquiring  whether 
they  may  not  be  briefly  and  accurately  conveyed  by  help  of 
such  symbols  as  those  of  mathematics.  It  must  however  be 
once  for  all  insisted  on,  that  our  procedure  is  to  be  logical  and 
not  mathematical  For  suggestions  indeed,  coming  whether 
from  mathematics  or  from  any  other  source,  we  shall  be 
grateful,  (the  sign  for  division  is  suggested  in  this  way,  as  will 
be  shown  in  the  next  chapter).  But  our  determination  and 
justification  of  the  requisite  processes  must  be  governed  solely 


II.]  Symbols  of  classes  and  of  operations.  39 

by  the  requirements  of  logic  and  common  sense.  Of  course 
if  symbols  which  were  originally  designed  for  one  purpose, 
are  found  to  work  conveniently  in  some  other  application, 
various  interesting  and  important  questions  are  raised.  Ac- 
cordingly we  may  hereafter  have  to  discuss  such  questions  as 
these  : — how  it  comes  to  pass  that  a  set  of  symbols  will  thus 
answer  two  very  different  purposes  as  well  as  they  do;  within 
what  limits  such  extensions  may  be  relied  upon  as  trust- 
worthy, and  so  forth. 

I.  In  the  first  place,  then,  we  often  require  to  group  two 
or  more  classes  together,  so  as  to  make  one  aggregate  class 
out  of  them.  We  do  not  want  to  sink  their  individualizing 
characteristics,  so  as  to  reduce  them  to  one  miscellaneous  and 
indistinguishable  group;  but  leaving  their  respective  class 
distinctions  untouched,  to  throw  them  together,  for  some 
special  purpose,  into  a  single  aggregate.  We  want  to  talk  or 
think  of  them  as  a  whole.  Besides  making  assertions,  for 
instance,  about  clergy,  lawyers  and  doctors  separately,  I  may 
want  to  make  assertions  about  all  three  classes  together, 
under  the  title,  say,  of  the  learned  professions. 

There  ought  not,  one  would  think,  to  be  much  opening 
here  for  doubt  and  confusion.  What  however  with  the  am- 
biguities of  popular  language,  and  the  disputes  of  rival  modes 
of  symbolic  statement,  a  little  cloud  of  confusion  has  been 
stirred  up.  The  possibility  of  this  has  arisen  mainly  from  a 
want  of  proper  care  in  clearly  distinguishing  between  the 
various  questions  at  issue1. 

1  Three  distinct  questions  are  in-  Secondly,  the  verbal  question,  partly 

volved,  which  ought  to  be  discussed  grammatical,  partly  one  of  logical 

apart.     First  the  question  of  fact  as  usage,   as  to  the  interpretation    of 

regards  our  logical  operations  :   do  alternatives :  Can  we  specify,  context 

we  actually  require  thus  to  aggre-  apart,  in  which  of  the  three  possible 

gate  class  groups  in  distinct  ways?  senses    ' A   and    £'  and   'A    or  fi' 


40  Symbols  of  classes  and  of  operations.         [CHAP. 

The  difficulty  arises  as  follows.  Are  the  classes,  which  we 
thus  propose  to  group  together,  mutually  exclusive  or  not  ? 
If  they  are,  then  all  is  plain  enough.  And  often  this  is  the 
case,  owing  to  one  cause  or  another.  The  classes  may,  for 
instance,  be  contradictories,  like  'citizen  and  alien';  or  con- 
traries, like  'good  and  bad';  or  distinct  on  material  grounds, 
as  'British  and  American';  or  may  be  separated  off  from  one 
another  by  some  known  distinctions,  (distinctions,  as  remarked, 
about  the  grounds  of  which  our  Logic  does  not  much  concern 
itself).  In  these  cases  there  can  be  no  opening  to  confusion. 

More  often  however  the  classes  will  not  be  mutually 
exclusive,  but  will  more  or  less  overlap  one  another;  so  that 
the  same  individual  may  belong  to  both  of  them.  When  this 
is  so,  three  distinct  cases  may  present  themselves,  between 
which  we  must  clearly  distinguish. 

(1)  To  begin  with,  there  being  members  common  to  two 
classes  we  may  have  it  in  view  to  exclude  these  from  our 
aggregate.     In  physical  problems  it  may  happen  that  one  or 
other  alone  of  two  causes  will  produce  a  certain  effect,  but 
that  the  two  together  will  either  neutralize  each  other,  or  by 
their  excess  produce  something  else.     Or,  to  take  a  familiar 
example  of  another  kind,  we  might  have  it  in  view  to  announce 
the  pardon  of  two  classes  of  offenders,  but  expressly  wish  to 
exclude  the  aggravated  cases  which  fell  under  both  heads. 

(2)  The  more  frequent  case,  however,  is  that  in  which 
the  common  members  are  included  in  our  formula,  so  to  say, 

are  to  be  interpreted?  Thirdly,  the  the  third  is  mainly  reserved  for  the 
question  of  symbolic  procedure :  can  final  chapter.  (These  three  questions 
we  make  our  symbolic  system  equally  are,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  hopelessly 
powerful  and  elegant  without  mark-  confused  together  by  Prof.  Jevons ; 
ing  formally  whether  or  not  onr  alter-  the  statements  of  the  Pure  Logic  being 
natives  are  exclusive  ?  The  first  qnes-  mostly  repeated  without  verbal  altera- 
tion is  discussed  in  the  text  above,  the  tion  in  both  editions  of  the  Principles 
second  a  few  pages  further  on,  whilst  of  Science.) 


II.]  Symbols  of  classes  and  of  operations.  41 

by  a  double  right.  Whenever  we  are  discussing  mere 
qualifying  characteristics,  without  introduction  of  any  quan- 
tifying circumstances,  it  would  be  taken  for  granted  that 
the  members  of  both  classes  are  of  course  included. 

(3)  But  there  is  still  a  third  possible  case  for  examina- 
tion. May  we  ever  want  to  reckon  this  common  part  twice 
over  ?  In  numerical  applications  of  our  formula,  or  whenever 
considerations  of  quantity  are  in  any  way  introduced  by 
them,  it  seems  to  me  quite  clear  that  we  may  have  to 
do  so.  And  since  the  simple  forms  of  language  indicative 
of  class  aggregation  are  meant  to  be  of  general  application, 
many  cases  might  be  conceived  in  which  they  do  thus 
doubly  reckon  the  common  members.  This  has  been  too 
hastily  objected  to  by  urging,  for  example  that  if  we  take  all 
the  cattle  and  all  the  beasts  of  burden  from  a  promiscuous 
assemblage  of  animals,  we  do  not  think  of  counting  the 
common  part,  viz.  those  which  fall  under  both  designations, 
twice  over.  Of  course  we  do  not,  because  the  word  "take"  is 
one  which  in  most  of  its  applications  negatives  the  possibility 
of  repeated  performance.  A  thing  taken  once  may  be 
considered  to  be  taken  altogether.  A  still  better  instance  in 
support  of  this  view,  so  far  as  material  considerations  are 
concerned,  would  have  been  found  in  the  proposal  to  kill  the 
members  of  both  of  these  classes;  for  some  of  the  beasts 
of  burden  having  been  put  an  end  to  whilst  we  were  dealing 
with  the  cattle,  would  certainly  not  need  any  further  atten- 
tion. On  the  other  hand  it  would  be  easy  to  find  instances 
in  which  the  same  form  of  class  aggregation  by  no  means 
denies,  but  rather  suggests,  this  double  counting.  Suppose, 
for  instance,  we  found,  by  putting,  together  two  Acts  of 
Parliament,  that  'all  poachers  and  trespassers  are  to  be  fined 
20  shillings':  is  it  quite  certain  that  poachers  who  trespass, 
could  not  be  fined  40  shillings?  This  is,  I  apprehend, 


42  Symbols  of  classes  and  of  operations.         [CHAP, 

a  question  for  the  lawyers  to  decide1.  But  the  language 
is,  to  the  common  understanding,  certainly  ambiguous,  which 
is  sufficient  for  our  present  purpose.  Or,  if  postmen  and 
parish  clerks  were  authorized  to  apply  for  a  Christmas  box  of 
five  shillings,  does  anyone  suppose  that  postmen  who  hap- 
pened to  be  parish  clerks,  would  not  apply  for  ten  shillings 
altogether ;  and  is  it  quite  certain  that  their  claims  would  be 
rejected  ? 

On  the  whole  therefore  it  seems  clear  that  we  must 
at  least  recognize  all  these  three  varieties  of  simple  class 
aggregation  as  actually  likely  to  occur,  and  that  we  must  also 
admit  that  popular  language  does  not  distinguish  clearly 
between  them.  It  uses,  or  might  use,  the  same  form  for  all 
three,  leaving  it  to  the  context  to  decide  which  of  them 
is  intended  in  any  particular  case. 

There  is,  however,  for  logical  purposes,  a  broad  distinction 
between  them.  The  last  is  not  strictly  a  logical  mode  of 
aggregation,  or  rather  it  is  one,  not  of  Pure  Logic,  but  of 
Applied.  The  sorts  of  classes  and  class  relations  which  we 
require  as  a  basis  of  Logic,  must  lend  themselves  to  every 
kind  of  application,  qualitative  as  well  as  quantitative.  But 
the  last  mode,  in  which  the  surplus  is  reckoned  twice,  seems 
to  be  confined  to  applied  Logic;  that  is,  to  some  kind  of 
numerical  application  of  our  class  terms,  as  in  the  instances 
given  above.  This  mode  therefore  may  be  said  to  be  practi- 
cally rejected  by  all  logicians,  but  there  is  a  very  important 
difference  in  respect  of  the  mode  which  they  adopt  for 

1  There  seems  to  be  no  general  that  it  would  probably  be  decided  by 

rule  here.     On  enquiring   of   good  such  considerations  as  whether  the 

authorities  whether,  for  instance,  if  it  conditions  of  the  two  licences  were  the 

were  enacted  that  auctioneers  and  same,  whether  they  were  issued  by 

hawkers  should  take  out  a  licence,  the  same  authority,  were  imposed  in 

those  who  belonged  to  both  classes  the  same  Act,  and  so  forth, 
would  require  two  licences,  I  was  told 


ii.]  Symbols  of  classes  and  of  operations.  43 

rejecting  it.  Boole  preferred  what  we  will  call  the  strict  plan 
of  formally  excluding  any  duplicate  counting.  He  wrote  his 
alternatives  (as  will  presently  be  indicated)  in  the  form  'A  and 
the  B  which  is  not  A.'  Others,  who  have  more  or  less 
adopted  his  system,  have  employed  the  looser  form  of  writing 
'A  and  B,'  assuming  it  to  be  understood  as  a  matter  of 
course  that  the  A  which  happens  to  be  B  is  not  to  be 
reckoned  twice.  The  main  grounds  for  preferring  the  former 
plan  cannot  be  assigned  here,  since  they  introduce  important 
questions  of  symbolic  procedure.  But  simply  on  the  grounds 
now  before  us  I  should  choose  the  former.  If  indeed  it  were 
quite  certain  that  the  designation  'A  and  B,'  never  counted 
AB  twice  over,  there  would  be  something  to  be  said  in 
favour  of  taking  this  for  granted  in  Logic,  and  writing 
it  accordingly.  Inasmuch  however  as  this  does  not  seem 
to  be  the  case,  it  is  decidedly  better  to  mark  our  meaning  by 
the  very  form  of  our  symbolic  arrangement,  and  to  make 
it  formally  clear  that  there  is  to  be  no  such  double  reckoning. 
It  involves  somewhat  more  trouble  to  adopt  this  plan;  but 
saving  of  trouble  is  of  very  little  importance  in  Logic, 
compared  with  the  habit  of  keeping  necessary  distinctions 
prominently  before  us. 

In  order  not  to  break  the  thread  of  connection  at  this 
point  I  will  just  remark  at  once  that  these  three  meanings 
may  be  thus  indicated  on  the  system  here  adopted  : — 

A  not-B  +  B  not- A,     A  +  B  not- A,     A  +B. 

In  the  first  we  exclude  the  AB  members ;  in  the  second 
we  simply  include  them,  that  is  we  count  them  once  like 
their  neighbours ;  in  the  third  these  AB's  must  be  considered 
to  be  counted  twice  over.  But  inasmuch  as  this  last  would 
introduce  alien  considerations  of  a  numerical  character  we  shall 
as  a  rule  reject  that  form.  If  ever  it  makes  its  appearance,  as 


44  Symbols  of  classes  and  of  operations.         [CHAP. 

representing  a  class,  in  the  statement  of  our  premises,  it  must 
be  understood  that  A  and  B  are  in  that  case  so  obviously 
exclusive  by  their  very  signification  (i.  e.  materially  exclusive) 
that  such  a  form  cannot  lead  to  error.  It  is  somewhat 
briefer,  and,  if  it  be  rather  slovenly  to  adopt  a  form  which 
strictly  counts  a  part  twice  over,  at  least  there  can  be  no 
mistake  in  consequence,  if  it  be  known  that  such  a  part  does 
not  exist. 

We  must  now  take  some  notice  of  the  attempts  of  popular 
language  to  express  the  above  meanings.  That  it  can  do  this, 
by  using  words  enough  for  the  purpose,  is  obvious  ;  but  there 
is  something  almost  bewildering  in  the  laxity,  in  the  combined 
redundancy  and  deficiency,  of  our  common  vocabulary  in  this 
respect.  Broadly  speaking  we  employ  two  conjunctions,  'and' 
and  'or',  for  thus  aggregating  classes;  these  terms  being  practi- 
cally synonymous  in  this  reference,  and  both  alike  leaving  it  to 
be  decided  by  the  context  whether  or  not  they  exclude  the 
common  part.  Often  there  is  no  such  part,  the  terms  being 
known  to  be  exclusive  of  one  another  ;  but  if  there  be  such, 
and  the  context  does  not  make  our  meaning  plain,  we  often  add 
a  clause  'including  both',  or  'excluding  both',  or  something  to 
that  effect,  in  order  to  remove  all  doubt.  (The  third  of  the 
recently  mentioned  cases,  being  comparatively  exceptional, 
and  hardly  likely  to  occur  except  in  some  kind  or  other 
of  numerical  inference  or  application,  may  be  left  out  of 
consideration.) 

Thus,  'Lawyers  are  either  barristers  or  solicitors',  'Lawyers 
consist  of  barristers  and  solicitors',  must  be  taken  as  being 
equivalent  statements.  They  both  alike  state  that  the  class 
of  Lawyers  is  made  up  of,  or  co-extensive  with,  the  two  classes 
of  'barristers'  and  'solicitors'.  Whether  a  barrister  can  be  a 
solicitor  they  do  not  give  the  slightest  hint.  Nor  if  such  bo 
the  case  do  they  unequivocally  inform  us  whether  these  com- 


II.]  •  Symbols  of  classes  and  of  operations.  45 

mon  members  are  to  be  included  or  not ;  though  as  inclusion 
is  the  far  more  usual  case  this  would  be  very  strongly  assumed 
in  the  absence  of  any  statement  to  the  contrary. 

There  is,  of  course,  a  slight  difference  between  the  signi- 
fication of  these  two  particles.  The  word  'lawyers',  when 
identified  with  '  barristers  and  solicitors',  being  taken  some- 
what more  collectively,  and  when  identified  with  '  barristers 
or  solicitors'  somewhat  more  distributively,  as  logicians  say. 
Hence  when  our  subject  is  an  individual  a  real  distinction  will 
be  introduced  by  the  use  of  one  term  rather  than  the  other. 
Thus  to  say  of  any  person  that  'he  is  deceiver  or  deceived',  is 
by  no  means  the  same  thing  as  to  say  that  'he  is  deceiver  and 
deceived'.  But  the  distinction  here  seems  merely  forced 
upon  us  by  the  necessity  of  the  case  and  not  by  the  nature  of 
the  grouping  of  the  two  classes.  The  individual  cannot,  like 
a  class,  be  split  up  into  two  parts  ;  accordingly  his 'collective' 
reference  to  two  classes  forces  us  to  conclude  that  one  person 
at  least  must  be  common  to  both  classes,  that  one  deceiver 
must  be  deceived;  whereas  his  'distributive'  reference  to  the 
two  classes  carries  no  such  implication  with  it.  This  must 
rank  of  course  amongst  the  many  perplexities  and  intricacies 
of  popular  speech,  but  it  does  not  seem  at  variance  with  the 
statement  that  regarded  as  mere  class  groupings,  independent 
of  particular  applications,  'A  and  B',  'A  or  B\  must  as  a  rule 
be  considered  as  equivalent. 

In  addition  to  these  words,  and  and  or,  we  have  a  variety 
of  other  words  and  phrases  at  our  occasional  service  ;  such  as, 
'as  well  as',  'also',  'not  excepting',  and  so  forth, — all  of  which 
serve  the  same  purpose  of  aggregating  class  terms  together  so 
as  to  make  them  represent  a  single  whole.  But  how  they 
aggregate  them,  in  respect  of  this  matter  of  iuclusiveness, 
must  be  a  matter  of  interpretation  and  of  reference  to  the 
context. 


46  Symbols  of  classes  and  of  operations.        [CHAT. 

II.  The  next  way  in  which  we  have  to  consider  the 
mutual  relation  of  classes  is  when  one  is  excluded  from  another. 
It  is  often  convenient  to  begin  by  taking  account  of  some 
aggregate  class,  and  then  proceed  to  set  aside  a  portion  of  it 
and  omit  it  from  consideration.  This  process  is  the  simple 
inverse  of  that  discussed  above,  and  the  difficulties  to  which  its 
expression  has  given  rise  spring  from  corresponding  causes. 
Three  cases  may  be  noticed  in  order. 

(1)  One  of  the  classes  may  be  included  within  the  other 
(or  within  one  or  more  of  the  others,  if  the  group  consists  of 
several).     In  this   case   the   omission    or  exclusion  cannot 
give  rise  to  any  perplexity,  but  is  perfectly  simple  and  intel- 
ligible. 

(2)  Again,  if  the  classes  are  mutually  exclusive  of  one 
another,   the   omission   of  either  from  the  other  is  equally 
simple,  but  unintelligible.     The  direction  to  omit  the  women 
from  the  men  in  a  given  assembly  has  no  meaning.     At  least 
it  will  require  some  discussion  about  the  interpretation  of 
symbolic  language  in  order  to  assign  a  meaning  to  it. 

(3)  But  if  the  two  classes  are  partly  inclusive  and  partly 
exclusive  of  one  another,  we  are  landed  in  somewhat  of  a 
difficulty.     What  for  instance,  would  be  meant  by  speaking 
of  "all  trespassers  omitting  the  poachers"?  If  we  interpreted 
this  with  the  rigid  stringency  with  which  we  treat  symbols, 
we  should  have  to  begin  by  deducting  the  common  part,  viz. 
the  poachers  who  trespass,  from  the  trespassers ;  and  should 
then  be  left  with  an  unmanageable  remainder,  viz.  the  poachers 
who  did  not  trespass,  and  who  could  not  therefore  be  omitted. 

Popular  language  is  of  course  intended  to  provide  for 
popular  wants,  and  must  be  interpreted  in  accordance  with 
them.  Hence  a  laxity  of  usage  is  permitted  in  its  case  which 
could  not  be  tolerated  in  the  case  of  symbols.  Accordingly 
when  we  meet  with  such  a  phrase  as  that  in  question,  we  take 


II.]  Symbols  of  classes  and  of  operations.  47 

it  for  granted  that  any  such  uninterpretable  remainder  is  to 
be  disregarded,  and  we  understand  that  'trespassers  omitting 
poachers'  is  to  be  taken  to  signify  'trespassers,  omitting  such 
trespassers  as  poach.' 

Here  too  we  have  a  variety  of  phrases  at  command  to 
convey  the  desired  meaning.  The  word  most  frequently  used 
for  this  purpose  is  perhaps  'except',  as  when  we  say  'Lawyers, 
except  Chancery  barristers'.  In  this  case  we  specify  the  sub- 
class to  be  omitted,  but  sometimes  we  can  express  our  meaning 
better  by  specifying  the  portion  which  is  not  to  be  omitted, 
as  when  we  say  'Lawyers,  provided  they  are  Chancery 
barristers',  which  means  that  we  are  to  except  all  who  are 
not  so.  Besides  these  phrases  we  have  a  number  of  others 
to  choose  from,  such  as,  'omitting',  'excluding',  'but  not', 
'only  if  not',  and  so  forth. 

III.  Our  third  logical  operation  in  dealing  with  classes 
consists  of  selecting  the  common  members  from  two  or  more 
overlapping  classes.  This  is  the  statement  of  the  process  in 
respect  of  denotation, — the  only  side  of  terms,  as  previously 
remarked,  with  which  we  are  properly  concerned.  If  however 
we  choose  to  express  the  same  thing  in  respect  of  connotation 
we  should  say  that  given  two  sets  of  attributes  as  distinctive 
of  certain  groups,  we  propose  to  confine  ourselves  to  the 
attributes  which  occur  in  both  groups.  It  is  obvious  that  such 
a  mode  of  class  relation  will  as  a  rule  result  in  a  restriction  or 
limitation  of  the  numbers  of  things  taken  into  account.  This 
clearly  must  be  so  unless  the  two  classes  happen  to  be 
coincident,  owing  to  our  having  really  two  names  for  the  same 
group  ;  or  unless  one  class  is  entirely  included  in  the  other,  in 
which  case  the  combination  of  the  two  is  equivalent  to  the 
neglect  of  the  wider  one.  In  this  latter  case  we  have  limited 
the  wider  class,  but  have  left  the  narrower  one  with  its  limits 
unaltered. 


48  Symbols  of  classes  and  of  operations.         [CHAP. 

The  way  in  which  common  language  indicates  this  opera- 
tion is  very  commonly  by  simple  juxtaposition  of  the  terms 
involved.  This  plan  is  always  admissible  when  one  term 
is  a  substantive  and  the  other  an  adjective,  and  not  unfre- 
quently  in  other  cases  also ;  though  as  the  logician,  when 
he  employs  ordinary  language,  has  to  act  in  concert  with 
the  grammarian,  he  naturally  finds  his  freedom  of  expression 
rather  hampered. 

But  though  the  readiest  way  of  naming  the  part  common 
to  two  assigned  classes  is  by  simple  juxtaposition  of  the 
respective  names, — as  when  we  say  'black  men'  to  mark 
those  individuals  who  are  both  black  and  men, — it  is  far 
from  being  the  only  way.  Here,  as  elsewhere,  the  resources 
of  language  are  only  too  copious  and  varied  for  the  logician. 
We  have  quite  a  collection  of  popular  phrases  at  disposal, 
differing  from  one  another  not  so  much  in  what  they  logically 
assert  as  in  what  they  are  conventionally  understood  to 
imply  in  addition.  Sometimes  this  implication  may  be 
so  strong  that  it  is  difficult  to  say  where  mere  suggestion 
ceases  and  actual  logical  predication  must  be  considered 
to  begin.  Thus  it  comes  about  that  such  words  as  and, 
bid,  accordingly,  together  with  a  host  of  others,  are  all 
employed  to  express  the  process  of  selecting  the  common 
part  in  two  overlapping  classes.  'Zulus  are  savages  and 
cunning',  'are  savages  but  cunning',  'are  cunning  but 
savages',  'being  savages  are  cunning',  must  all  be  understood 
as  indicating  exactly  the  same  kind  and  degree  of  class 
limitation.  They  all  alike  assert  that  the  class  'Zulu'  is 
contained  somewhere  within  the  common  part  of  the 
classes  'savage'  and  'cunning';  or,  if  we  prefer  so  to  put 
it,  that  they  possess  the  attributes  distinctive  of  these 
two  terms.  Where  they  differ  from  one  another  is  not 
in  respect  cf  what  they  assert  but  in  respect  of  what  they 


II.]  Symbols  of  classes  and  of  operations.  49 

imply  ;  the  first  containing  no  further  implication,  the  second 
implying  the  independent  proposition  that  'most  savages 
are  not  cunning',  the  third  that  'most  cunning  people 
are  not  savage',  and  the  fourth  that  'most,  or  all,  savages 
are  cunning'.  But  when  we  come  to  write  them  down, 
we  should  be  forced  to  reject  all  these  suggestions,  and 
to  express  them  each  alike  in  the  form  'All  Zulus  are 
savage-cunning'. 

Again;  in  common  speech,  adjectives  are  often  am- 
biguous by  not  distinguishing  whether  they  are  predicative 
of  a  whole  class  or  merely  selective  out  of  it.  When  I 
read  of  "those  who  claim  the  black-skinned  Hindoo  as 
a  brother"  I  cannot  be  certain  whether  this  phrase  picks 
out  certain  Hindoos  only,  by  this  characteristic,  or  whether 
it  is  meant  to  inform  us  that  all  Hindoos  possess  the 
characteristic.  As  in  so  many  other  cases  we  do  not  know 
what  exactly  is  meant  to  be  implied  beyond  what  is  directly 
stated. 

The  following  simple  sentence  is  one  of  many  which 
might  be  offered  to  illustrate  the  combined  redundancy 
and  deficiency  of  common  speech  in  the  expression  of  these 
class  relations : — "The  proper  recipients  of  charity  are  those 
who  are  poor  but  honest,  or  sick  and  old,  and  those  who 
are  young  if  they  be  orphans".  Here  we  are  simply  treating 
as  an  aggregate  class  the  three  classes  describable  as  'poor- 
honest',  'sick-old',  and  'young-orphan',  each  of  these  three 
being  the  common  part  of  two  overlapping  classes.  But 
the  various  words  used  to  connect  our  class-terms  seem 
almost  as  if  they  were  chosen  at  hazard.  For  the  purpose 
of  expressing  aggregation  or  addition  we  have  used  and 
and  or ;  and  for  that  of  expressing  the  selection  of  a  common 
part  we  have  used  and,  but,  and  if. 

We  have  now  enumerated  and  described  the  three 
v.  L.  4 


50  Symbols  of  classes  and  of  operations.         [CHAP. 

principal  logical  operations  which  are  concerned  with  the 
mutual  relations  of  our  class  terms.  They  are,  I  think, 
the  only  operations  of  the  kind  which  would  naturally 
and  spontaneously  present  themselves  to  the  mind.  There 
is,  it  is  true,  a  fourth  operation  which  will  have  to  be  dis- 
cussed in  the  next  chapter,  but  it  is  not  by  any  means 
an  obvious  one1.  Instead  of  being  forced  upon  our  notice 
like  the  above  three,  not  only  by  logical  necessity  but  by 
the  requirements  of  daily  speech  and  thought,  it  rather 
comes  to  us  by  way  of  our  symbols.  Its  very  existence 
may  be  said  to  be  suggested  by  the  wish  to  make  our 
symbolic  scheme  complete  and  symmetrical.  We  will  there- 
fore set  it  aside  for  the  present,  until  we  have  discussed 
the  appropriate  symbolic  language  for  the  three  operations 
which  are  so  familiar  to  us. 

When  we  look  about,  in  order  to  choose  our  symbols, 
those  of  elementary  mathematics  naturally  offer  themselves. 
Any  that  we  shall  need  are  very  simple  and  almost  univer- 
sally familiar,  so  that  it  seems  at  any  rate  worth  while  to 
try  if  they  will  answer  our  purpose.  Not  of  course  that 
we  propose  to  use  them  in  the  same  sense  as  that  primarily 
imposed  upon  them.  On  the  contrary,  the  signification 
they  will  have  to  bear  has  been  already  definitely  settled 
for  them  in  the  foregoing  discussion,  and  this  distinctly  varies 
from  their  natural  or  primary  signification.  Even  where 
the  analogy  is  closest,  as  in  the  aggregation  of  classes  above 
described,  we  are  not  engaged  in  a  process  of  addition.  The 
process  we  have  to  perform  may  be  be,st  described,  in 
familiar  words,  as  that  of  throwing  several  compartments 
into  one ;  but  we  have  no  thought  of  counting  individuals 

1  I  allude  here,  not  to  the  process      cussed  presently,  but  to  the  logical 
of  equating,  indicated  by  ( = )  and  dis-      analogue  of  division. 


II.]  Symbols  of  classes  and  of  operations.  51 

or  in  any  way  adding  up  numbers.  We  do  not  'add'  together 
the  English,  French,  Germans,  and  so  forth,  in  order  to  make 
up  the  Europeans.  Of  course  such  a  process  of  class  ag- 
gregation may  be  made  a  basis  of  numerical  calculation,  but 
then  so  it  may  of  many  other  operations  with  which  it  is 
in  no  way  to  be  confounded.  I  cannot  see  that  we  are 
justified  in  any  case  in  considering  that  there  is  more  than  an 
analogy,  sometimes  indeed  a  very  close  one,  between  these 
operations  of  Logic  and  those  of  mathematics.  Certainly 
the  employment  of  the  same  symbols  must  not  be  construed 
into  an  admission  that  this  is  so. 

I.  To  begin  with  the  operation  of  aggregating  two 
or  more  classes  into  one.  This  seems  to  be  so  naturally 
represented  by  the  sign  for  addition,  that  one  can  hardly 
avoid  writing  down  some  such  expression  as  x  +  y  +  z  to 
represent  the  class  made  up  of  x,  yy  and  z.  No  other  formal 
or  symbolic  justification  for  it  seems  to  be  called  for  than  these, 
— that  the  order  of  the  terms  thus  connected  is  entirely 
indifferent,  and  that  the  aggregation  of  two  groups  is  equi- 
valent to  the  aggregation  of  the  detailed  classes  which  com- 
pose them;  that  is,  we  must  accept  the  commutative  and 
associative  laws.  Whatever  sense  we  put  upon  the  sign 
we  must  secure  that  x  +  y  and  y  +  x  shall  have  precisely  the 
same  signification,  and  that  (x  +  y)  +  (z  +  w)  is  equivalent 
to  x  +  y  +  z  +  w.  It  is  so  in  mathematics,  and  it  must  be 
so  in  Logic  too  if  the  symbol  is  to  answer  its  purpose.  That 
this  condition  is  secured  in  Logic  is  obvious ;  for  the  order 
in  which  we  group  our  terms  is  perfectly  immaterial,  and 
is  recognized  as  being  so  in  the  common  usage  of  and  and  or. 
Indeed  common  language  has  so  thoroughly  appreciated  this 
fact  that  it  does  not  seem  to  have  prepared  any  pitfalls  here 
against  which  the  logician  has  to  be  on  his  guard.  In  what- 
ever order  we  arrange  the  'Jews,  Turks,  infidels,  and  heretics, ' 

4—2 


52  Symbols  of  classes  and  of  operations.        [CHAP. 

we  cannot  extract  any  difference  of  signification  out  of 
the  combined  group1. 

We  must  however  clearly  understand  that  in  adopting 
this  sign  (+)  we  have  to  some  extent  committed  ourselves  in 
the  matter  of  the  mutual  exclusiveness  discussed  a  few  pages 
back.  For  wherever  we  meet  with  such  a  form  as  A  +B  +  C 
in  mathematics  it  is  always  supposed  that  A,  B,  C,  are 
mutually  exclusive,  whether  the  symbols  stand  for  things  or 
for  operations ;  or  that,  if  they  are  not,  the  common  parts 
must  be  considered  to  have  been  taken  twice  over.  It  is  never 
tolerated  that  they  should  overlap  one  another  and  leave  it  to 
us  to  make  the  correction  by  omitting  what  would  otherwise 
be  doubly  reckoned.  Accordingly,  if  we  wish  to  be  quite 
consistent,  we  ought  to  do  the  same  in  Logic.  That  is, 
we  must  take  care  to  ascertain  that  the  terms  which  we  thus 
connect  are  mutually  exclusive  of  one  another.  If  we  happen 
to  know  that  this  is  already  the  case,  on  either  formal  or 
material  grounds,  then  there  is  no  harm  in  our  writing  x  +  y 
at  once.  But  if  this  be  not  known,  then  we  must  take  care 
to  make  them  exclusive,  which  is  readily  done  by  expressing 
it  as  lx  +  y  not-#.'  (Of  course  if  we  want  to  omit  the  com- 
mon part  altogether,  we  should  put  it  'x  not-y  +  y  not-#.') 

The  necessity   of  thus  expressing  ourselves    has    been 

1  The  systematic  employment  of  ton  (Log.  I.  80),  but  this  is  an  inter- 

this  sign  (+)  Tor  this  particular  pur-  pretation  in  intension.  The  sign  was 

pose  of  class  aggregation  dates,   I  also  used  by  Ploucquet  to  mark  the 

apprehend,  from  Boole.    Of  course  combination  of  assertions  or  premises, 

the  sign  itself  had  been  introduced  and  by  Maimon  and  Darjes  to  stand 

into  Logic  long  before.    Thus  Leib-  for  affirmation  in  contrast  with  nega- 

nitz  (Specimen  demonstrandi,  Erdm.  tion.    Maimon  however  used  another 

p.  94)  writes  A  +  B  to  mark  the  ad-  sign  (  |  )  in  a  case  of  exactly  the 

dition  of   attributes   or  notions  to  same  kind  as  that  which  we  now 

form    a    more   complex   notion,  in  mark  by  (  +  ),  as  in,  a  +  b  \  c  \  d,  for 

which  he  has  been  followed  by  others,  la  is  either  b  or  c  or  d'  (Versuch 

e.  g.  Twesten  (Log.  p.  25)  and  Hamil-  einer  neucn  Logik,  p.  G9). 


II.]  Symbols  of  classes  and  of  operations.  53 

objected  to  on  various  grounds,  which  seem  to  me  decidedly 
insufficient,  but  which  will  be  discussed  in  a  future  chapter. 
It  doubtless  involves  somewhat  more  trouble  in  writing  down 
our  formulae.  But  the  extra  trouble  thus  entailed  is  after  all 
but  slight,  and,  as  pointed  out  in  the  preface,  mere  expedition 
in  the  performance  of  the  work  is  not  by  any  means  an 
important  consideration  in  Symbolic  Logic.  On  the  other 
hand,  there  may  be  urged  in  its  favour,  the  high  advantage  of 
keeping  real  distinctions  present  to  the  eye  by  means  of 
the  formulae  we  employ;  the  greater  harmony  thus  secured 
with  the  analogous  steps  in  Mathematics;  and  a  certain 
considerable  increase  of  symbolic  power,  which  (as  will  be 
shown  in  future  chapters)  we  are  thus  enabled  to  acquire. 

II.  The  deduction,  omission,  or  subtraction,  (it  will 
be  seen  that  we  can  hardly  help  resorting  at  once  to  mathe- 
matical terms  here)  of  one  class  from  another  is  expressed 
with  equal  convenience  by  aid  of  the  symbol  (— );  so  that 
x  —  y  will  stand  for  the  class  that  remains  when  x  has  had 
all  the  ?/'s  left  out  of  it.  The  only  point  here  that  seems  to 
call  for  sj'mbolic  justification  is  the  ascertainment  of  the  fact 
that  the  well  known  mathematical  rule,  about  minus  twice 
repeated  producing  plus,  is  secured  in  Logic.  That  is, 
we  must  ascertain  that  it  is  so,  both  in  the  processes  we 
actually  perform,  and  in  the  language  we  use  to  describe 
them.  And  this  may  be  established  by  a  single  suitable 
example.  Thus  if  we  describe  the  persons  who  may  remain  in 
a  captured  town  as  'all  the  inhabitants  except  the  military, 
but  omitting  from  these  the  wounded';  the  wounded  military 
are  understood  to  be  put  back,  by  virtue  of  the  two 
'omissions',  into  the  same  position  as  the  non-military ; — pro- 
vided, of  course,  that  there  are  only  two  alternatives  in  the 
case.  It  is  just  a  case  of  x  —  (y  —  z)  —  x  —  y  +  z.  So  'the  rule 
holds  in  Logic. 


54  Symbols  of  classes  and  of  operations.        [CHAP. 

In  using  this  symbol  we  must  remember  the  condition 
necessarily  implied  in  the  performance  of  the  operation  which 
it  represents.  As  was  remarked,  we  cannot  'except'  anything 
from  that  in  which  it  was  not  included;  so  that  x  —  y 
certainly  means  that  y  is  a  part  of  x.  This  is  quite  in 
accordance  with  the  generalized  use  of  the  symbol  in  mathe- 
matics where  it  is  always  considered  to  mark  the  undoing  of 
something  which  had  been  done  before.  Not  of  course  that 
it  must  thus  refer  to  the  immediately  preceding  step,  but  that 
there  must  be  some  step  or  steps,  in  the  group  of  which 
it  makes  a  part,  which  it  can  be  regarded  as  simply  reversing. 
The  expression  x  —  y  4-  z  will  be  satisfactory,  provided  either 
x  or  z  is  known  to  be  inclusive  of  y,  or  if  both  combine 
together  to  include  it1. 

III.  The  third  logical  operation,  namely  that  of  restric- 
tion to  the  common  part  of  two  assigned  classes,  may  be 
represented  by  the  sign  of  multiplication.  That  is,  x  x  yt 
or  xy,  will  stand  for  the  things  which  are  both  x  and  y. 

The  analogy  here  is  by  no  means  so  close  as  in  the 
preceding  cases,  but  the  justification  of  our  symbolic  usage 
must  still  be  regarded  as  resting  on  a  simple  question  of  fact : 
i.e.  do  we  in  the  performance  of  the  process  in  question,  and 

1  Leibnitz  (Specimen  demonstran-  ist  durch  das  Zeichen  (  =  ),  das  nicht 

di)  employed  this  sign,  but  his  view  durch  das  arithmetische  Verneinungs- 

of  Logic  being  one  of  'compreken-      zeichen  (— )  ausdriicken Kein  A 

sion',  A-B  meant,  with  him,  the  ist  If    ware    A=-AI"    (Lambert's 

omission  of  the  attribute  I)  from  the  Briefwechsel,   i.  396  : — This  is  not 

notion  A;  not  the  exception  of  B  as  Lambert's  own  notation).    There  is 

a  class  from  A  as  a  class.    As  al-  also  a  suggestion  in  this  direction  in 

ready  remarked,  the  sign  (-)  was  Leibnitz's  De  arte combinatorial  (Erd- 

frequently  employed  to  mark  logical  mann,  p.  23),  "Quemadmodumigitur 

negation,  as  by  Maimon  and  Darjes.  duo  suut  Algebraistarum  et  analyti- 

The  earliest  such  use  that  I  havo  corum  prima  signa  +  et  - ,  ita  dura 

noted  is  by  Lambert: — "In  dieser  quasi  copula  est  et  non  ett." 
Absicht  Hesse  sich  das  Bindwortchen 


II.]  Symbols  of  classes  and  of.  operations.  55 

in  the  verbal  statement  of  it,  act  under  the  same  laws  of 
operation  in  each  case,  logical  and  mathematical  alike?  The 
answer  is  that  we  do  so  up  to  a  certain  point,  but  not  beyond. 

For  instance  the  commutative  law1,  as  it  is  termed,  viz.  the 
indifference  of  the  order  of  the  symbols,  prevails;  xy  and  yx, 
English  Protestants  and  Protestant  English,  being  precisely 
the  same  class.  So  does  the  distributive  law,  that  every 
element  of  the  one  multiplier  shall  combine  with  every 
element  of  the  other,  that  e.g.  x  (y  +  z)  —  xy  +  xz,  and 
(x  +  y]  (z  +  w)  —  xz  +  xw  +  yz  +  yw.  Of  course  we  have  to 
make  our  way  here  through  various  grammatical  obstacles, 
but  allowing  for  them  it  is  clearly  true  that  we  do  thus 
combine  and  distribute  our  terms,  so  that '  English  and  French 
soldiers  and  sailors',  is  the  same  as  'English  soldiers,  and 
English  sailors,  and  French  soldiers,  and  French  sailors'. 
When  however  we  say  that  this  commutative  law  holds 
in  common  speech,  we  must  remember  that  the  idiosyncracies 
of  language  insist  upon  exceptions  here  as  elsewhere;  and 
on  the  same  ground,  viz.  the  necessity  of  compressing  a 
quantity  of  implication  into  our  sentences,  in  addition  to  the 
direct  assertions  they  contain.  Thus  when  x  implies  y  we  al- 
ways use  the  form  yx,  rather  than  xy.  For  instance  one  would 
not  direct  a  legacy  to  those  old  servants  "who  are  destitute 
and  alive"  ;  but  to  those  "who  are  alive  and  destitute". 

It  will  be  equally  obvious  that  if  x  =  y  then  zx  =  zy, 
that  is,  that  we  may  'multiply'  equivalent  terms  by  the 
same  factor.  For  (as  will  be  more  distinctly  insisted  on 
presently)  x  =  y  means  that  the  individuals  which  go  by  the 
names  x  and  y  are  the  same;  consequently  it  comes  to 

1  The  introduction  of  these  techni-  particular  sense)  were  introduced  by 

cal  terms  appears  to  be  of  recent  date.  Servois  in  Gergonne's  Annales  v.  93 

Hankel  (Vorlcsungen,  p.  3)  says  that  (1814) ;  and  associative  by  Sir  W.  E. 

distributive  and  commutative  (in  this  Hamilton. 


56  Symbols  of  classes  and  of  operations.        [CHAP. 

exactly  the  same  thing  whether  we  select  the  /s  from  them, 
under  their  name  of  x  or  their  name  of  y.  In  each  case  alike 
we  get  the  same  result. 

Where  we  depart  from  mathematical  usage,  or  rather 
restrict  the  generality  of  its  laws,  is  in  the  following  respect. 
As  a  rule,  xx  (or  #2)  is  different  from  x.  If  x  represent 
a  number,  then  #2  is  greater  or  less  than  x,  according  as  x  is 
greater  or  less  than  1 ;  if  x  represent  a  line,  then  x*  represents 
an  area,  and  so  forth.  But  in  Logic  #2  must  equal  x,  or 
rather  any  number  of  self  multiplications  must  leave  the 

significance  of  a  term  unaltered,  i.e.  x  =  xxx That  this 

is  so  as  an  operation,  is  obvious,  for  the  selection  of  the 
common  part  of  two  classes,  when  these  classes  happen  to  be 
the  same,  is  reduced  to  the  simple  repetition  of  this  one  part. 
And  that  the  same  is  true  as  regards  the  laws  and  usages  of 
common  speech  must  also  be  admitted.  Or  rather,  it  must 
be  admitted  under  some  exceptions;  for  there  are  signs 
of  divergence  towards  the  mathematical  rule  here,  when  we 
are  dealing  with  comparative  terms.  Thus,  even  in  English, 
'great  great'  does  not  mean  quite  the  same  as  'great'  alone; 
and  in  some  languages,  as  Italian  for  instance,  adjectival 
repetition  is  really  almost  like  mathematical  multiplication, 
increasing  or  diminishing  the  effect  according  as  the  term  is 
in  itself  an  augmentative  or  diminutive.  If  this  conventional 
rule  prevailed  universally  in  respect  of  all,  or  even  most 
terms,  the  logician  would  have  to  give  way  to  the  grammarian 
here,  with  the  result  of  having  to  abandon  Symbolic  Logic,  as 
a  distinct  formal  science  from  Mathematics '.  As  it  is,  however, 
we  feel  at  liberty  to  set  aside  this  'comparative'  usage  as  an 

1  Any  one  who  has  read  Algebra  equation  to  the  first  degree.    Hence 

will  nee  the  importance  of  this  re-  any  equations  with  any  number  of 

ntriction  in  the  processes  of  logical  terms  are  resolvable  by  the  expendi- 

calculation.    It  reduce*  every  logical  ture  of  sufficient  time  and  trouble. 


II.]  Symbols  of  classes  and  of  operations.  57 

irregularity,  and  to  lay  it  down  universally  that  xx  shall  be 
considered  the  same  as  x. 

It  may  be  pointed  out  that  this  is  not  so  much  an 
infringement  of  mathematical  laws  as  a  special  restriction  of 
them.  In  fact  there  is  one  case  in  which  the  same  rule  does 
hold  in  mathematics,  that  is  when  x  stands  for  unity.  In  that 
case  xx  =  x  obviously1. 

So  far  then  seems  plain.  It  must  now  be  enquired  what, 
on  the  suppositions  thus  made,  will  be  the  proper  mode  of 
representing  certain  important  and  limiting  classes  with  which 
we  shall  often  have  to  deal.  How,  for  instance,  shall  we 
represent  "all  things" : — or  rather,  to  speak  more  correctly, 
how  shall  we  represent  the  'universe  of  discourse'  with  which 
we  may  happen  to  be  concerned ; — about  the  nature  of  which 
universe  we  shall  have  something  more  to  say  hereafter  ?  It 
may  at  first  occur  to  the  reader  that  the  most  appropriate 
way  of  representing  such  a  huge  and  miscellaneous  assemblage 
as  this  would  be  by  the  sign  for  infinity,  since  mathematics  has 
such  a  sign  at  its  disposal.  We  might  resolve  so  to  represent 
it  if  we  pleased 2 ;  but,  if  we  did,  we  should  soon  find  that 
we  were  acting  inconsistently  with  the  plan  we  have  just 

1  There  was  a  much  freer  em-  AB  for  "A  that  is  B",  (Erd.  p.  102) 

ployment  of  this  sign  for  multiplica-  and  similar  forms  are  of  constant 

tion,  than   of  that  for  addition,  by  occurrence    in    Ploucquet's    logical 

the    earlier    symbolists.     This    was  writings.    But  note  how  the  latter 

probably  owing  to  two  causes :  partly,  describes  them :— "  Durch  mb  will  Ich 

that    here    the    comprehensive  and  keine  form  der  Multiplication  sondern 

extensive  views  come  so  much  more  eine  Associirung  der  Ideen  verstanden 

nearly  to  the  same  thing;  but  more  haben",  a  very  different  conception 

to  the  fact  that  popular  language  had  this  from  that  of  the  common  part 

already  familiarized  men  with  the  of  the  extension  of  m  and  b.    (Samm- 

juxtaposition  of  words  to  express  the  lung,  p.  254.) 

same  results  which  the  logician  ex-  2  It  has  indeed  been  so  represented 

presses   by  juxtaposition  of  letters.  by  more  than  one  symbolist.  (See  on, 

For  instance  Leibnitz  uses  the  form  ch.  vm.) 


58  Symbols  of  classes  and  of  operations.      ICHAP. 

adopted  of  indicating  combined  attributes  or  overlapping 
classes  by  the  sign  of  multiplication.  When  once  that  plan 
is  adopted  we  are  inevitably  bound  in  consistency  to  make 
the  symbol  for  unity,  or  1,  stand  for  the  universe.  That  this  is 
so  can  very  readily  be  shown.  For  what  does  our  x  stand  for? 
It  comprises  all  things  which  are  x.  In  other  words,  one  way 
of  describing  and  getting  at  x  is  to  say  that  we  combine,  or 
take  the  common  part  of,  the  universe  and  x,  just  as  'English 
men'  may  be  got  at  by  taking  the  common  part  of  the  classes 
which  are  English  and  which  are  men.  We  do  not  say  that 
this  is  the  only  way  of  getting  at  it,  but  it  is  one  way  and  there- 
fore our  results  must  be  consistent  with  so  reaching  it.  Now 
the  only  known  symbol  which  when  combined,  in  accordance 
with  the  rules  for  multiplication,  with  any  symbol  x,  will  always 
still  give  us  #,  is  unity.  Hence  the  one  universal  class  must 
be  represented  by  the  sign  for  unity,  so  that  1  x  #  shall  always 
equal  x. 

The  interpretation  of  the  commutative  law  in  the  case  of 
x  x  1  =  1  x  a;  deserves  a  moment's  attention.  If  we  regard  it 
as  a  process  of  selection  rather  than  as  the  indication  of  a 
result  (which  is  not  however  the  best  way  of  regard  ing  it)  we 
should  say  that  a;  x  1  may  be  described  as  the  process  of 
selecting  from  the  whole  universe  those  things  which  are  x. 
So  1  x  #  will  be  the  selection  from  x  of  all  those  things  which 
belong  to  the  universe,  which  of  course  leaves  x  unaffected. 

On  the  same  principles  a  non-existent  class,  or,  as  we 
shall  often  find  it  convenient  to  describe  it,  an  empty  compart- 
ment, will  be  fittingly  represented  by  the  sign  for  nothing,  or  0. 
This  looks  natural  and  plausible  enough ;  but  it  is  well  to 
point  out  that  it  follows  strictly  from  what  has  hitherto  been  laid 
down.  For  if  xy  stands  for  the  things  which  are  both  x  and  y, 
then  Oar,  or  0,  will  stand  for  those  which  are  both  nothing  and 
*;  in  other  words  for  the  non-existent,  or  for  any  empty  class. 


ii. J  Symbols  of  classes  and  of  operations.  59 

The  sign  of  subtraction  supplies  us  in  the  same  way  with 
a  suitable  expression  for  the  logical  contradictory  of  any  class 
x,  viz.  for  the  class  'not-x'.  For  since  not-#  comprises  every- 
thing which  the  universe  contains  except  what  is  x,  we  should 
write  it  symbolically1,  1  —  x.  Now  combine  x  and  1  —x,  and 
what  do  we  thus  indicate  ?  The  class  of  things  which  are  at 
the  same  time  x  and  not-x.  Of  course  this  is  bound  to  equal 
nothing  ;  i.e.  x  (1  —  x)  =  0.  This  supplies  a  link  of  consistency 
with  some  of  our  previous  assumptions.  For  'multiply  out' 
x  (1  —  x),  as  in  algebra,  and  we  have  x  —  x2  or  x  —  xx ;  which 
as  just  remarked,  is  to  be  equal  to  zero,  and  this  necessitates 
that  x  and  xx,  or  x*,  shall  be  identical  with  each  other,  which 
we  already  know  that  they  must  be. 

One  or  two  examples  may  be  added  in  illustration  of  the 
employment  of  our  symbols,  and  of  the  restrictions  to  which 
they  are  subject.  Suppose  we  have  the  expression  'English 
and  French  Poets  and  Orators'.  Following  the  indications 
already  given  we  might  propose  to  write  it  down  symbolically 
(a  +  6)  (c  +  d),  thus  combining  the  four  terms  by  the  signs 
respectively  of  addition  and  of  multiplication.  Multiplied 
out,  the  latter  becomes  ac  +  ad  +  be  +  bd.  Now  the  original 
verbal  statement,  when  fully  expressed  in  its  details,  is 
equivalent  to  English  poets  and  English  orators  and  French 
poets  and  French  orators,  that  is,  the  symbolic  process  of 
multiplication  gives  exactly  the  same  combinations  of  terms 
that  are  obtained  in  common  discourse  ;  the  two  corresponding 
step  for  step,  as  of  course  they  are  bound  to  do. 

In  this  case  the  condition  of  accurate  expression  previously 
alluded  to,  about  the  mutually  exclusive  character  of  our 
terms,  does  not  obviously  make  itself  perceptible,  but  that  is 
because  correction  is  tacitly  made  where  required,  when  the 

1  For  the  sake  of  brevity  we  shall      It  is  an  abbreviation  introduced  and 
commonly  write  "x  for  1  -  x,  or  not-x.       frequently  employed  by  Boole. 


60  Symbols  of  classes  and  of  operations.       [CHAP. 

symbols  are  translated  into  words.  Since  a  and  b,  standing 
for  French  and  English,  are  already  exclusive,  no  correction  is 
required.  But  c  and  d,  standing  for  poets  and  orators,  do 
overlap,  and  therefore  c  +  d  does  symbolically  count  this 
common  part  twice.  We  mentally  make  a  correction  at 
this  stage.  But  working  symbolically  we  come  upon  the 
same  repetition  again  in  the  final  form  be  +  bd.  Here  again 
we  make  a  correction  of  the  true  symbolic  import  of  this 
expression,  without  any  symbolic  warrant,  but  merely  to 
secure  what  we  know  to  be  meant ;  accordingly  we  conclude 
that  the  orator-poets  are  only  to  be  reckoned  once.  Symboli- 
cally we  have  no  right  to  do  this,  for  we  ought  to  have 
written  our  terms  down  in  the  form  of  mutual  exclusion. 
But  the  needed  correction  is  so  tacitly  and  readily  made 
that  we  are  hardly  conscious  of  requiring  to  appeal  to  it. 

In  other  cases  the  necessity  of  making  this  correction, 
when  translating  our  symbols  into  words,  is  forced  upon  our 
attention.  Suppose,  for  instance,  that  instead  of  combining 
two  distinct  groups,  like  (a  +  b)  (c  +  d),  we  combine  the  same 
twice  over.  Taking,  as  before  c  +  d  to  stand  for  the  poets 
and  orators,  what  is  denoted  by  (c  +  d)  (c  +  d)  ?  Clearly 
this  is  only  a  slightly  more  complicated  case  of  xx  =  x,  viz. 
(c  +  d)  (c  +  d)  must  =  (c  -f  d).  But  when  multiplied  out,  of 
course,  (c  +  d)  (c  +  d)  yields,  (on  our  symbolic  plan)  c  +  2cd  +  d. 
That  is  the  common  part  cd,  and  the  fact  of  its  being  counted 
twice  over,  is  here  forced  obtrusively  upon  our  notice.  We  are 
reminded  of  the  fact  (equally  true  in  the  former  case,  thougli 
it  escaped  notice  there)  that  we  had  no  symbolic  right  to  use 
the  expression  c  +  d  unless  c  and  d  were  mutually  exclusive. 
In  that  case  cd  =  0,  and  the  redundant  term  does  not  occur  to 
trouble  us. 

In  order  not  to  multiply  examples  needlessly  we  will  take 
one  more  which  involves  the  sign  of  subtraction,  and  see  how 


II.]  Symbols  of  classes  and  of  operations.  61 

that  answers  when  worked  out.  Take,  for  instance,  (a  —  b) 
(c  —  d)  and  see  what  it  might  stand  for  in  common  language, 
both  in  its  present  shape  and  as  it  would  become  when 
multiplied  out  in  detail.  The  following  would  be  a  fairly 
corresponding  verbal  expression : — 'Barristers  (excepting 
foreigners)  who  are  graduates,  but  not  of  Dublin'.  What  does 
this  mean  ?  It  seems  quite  clear  that  all  whom  we  can  possibly 
intend  to  except  from  the  barristers  are  foreign  barristers,  not 
foreigners  in  general,  and  that  all  whom  we  except  from  the 
graduates  are  Dublin  graduates.  In  other  words  this  process 
of  exception  or  subtraction  always  presupposes  that  the  class 
excepted  is  a  part  (formally  or  materially)  of  the  class  from 
which  it  is  excepted.  We  are  therefore  warranted  in  writing 
our  symbols  (a  —  ah)  (c  —.cd)  or  a  (1  —  Z>)  c  (1  —  d),  and  in  re- 
garding both  this  and  the  verbal  statement  as  being  com- 
pounded of  four  terms,  two  of  them  positive  and  two  of  them 
negative. 

But  the  question  was  not  so  much  whether  the  two 
expressions  corresponded  as  they  thus  stood,  but  whether 
the  result  of  multiplying  out  the  symbols  could  be  translated 
step  by  step  in  its  details  and  shown  to  correspond  to  the 
results  of  ordinary  thought.  Those  symbols,  when  treated 
by  the  ordinary  rules,  yield  the  result,  ac  —  acd  —  abc  +  abed. 
Is  there  any  thing  in  the  statement  about  the  barristers 
corresponding  to  all  this?  Certainly  there  is,  for  these 
symbols  as  they  thus  stand  in  detail,  are  literally  translatable 
into  the  words  'Graduate  barristers,  omitting  Dublin  graduate 
barristers,  omitting  also  foreign  graduate  barristers,  but 
adding  on  Foreign  Dublin  graduate  barristers'.  If  we  go 
through  this  we  shall  see  that  it  expresses  exactly  the  con- 
templated class,  but  with  one  important  proviso.  This  proviso 
is  that  the  expression  'omitting'  here  is  not  to  be  taken 
in  its  loose  popular  signification,  by  which  its  application  is 


(52  Symbols  of  classes  and  of  operations.        [CHAP. 

tacitly  understood  to  be  limited  to  the  range  of  the  term 
which  precedes  it,  but  in  its  strict  symbolic  signification  in 
accordance  with  which  we  may  omit  too  much,  and  there- 
fore find  it  necessary  to  add  on  a  term  to  correct  this  excess. 
This,  of  course,  is  the  real  meaning  of  the  final  term  abed. 
Common  language  left  to  itself,  would  have  compendiously 
expressed  the  details  in  the  form  ac  —  acd  —  abc,  that  is, 
would  have  put  it  '  Graduate  barristers,  omitting  those 
of  Dublin  and  the  foreign  ones'.  The  accurate  language 
of  symbols  requires  us  to  insert  a  final  term  which  common 
language  had  rejected  for  the  sake  of  brevity. 

The  above  examples  are  fairly  illustrative  of  a  number 
which  might  be  offered.  They  will  serve  to  explain  some 
of  the  main  points  of  our  system  of  Symbolic  Logic.  We 
see  that  we  may  employ  the  sign  of  addition  (+)  for  the 
aggregation  of  classes,  provided  we  make  our  classes  mutually 
exclusive  (which  common  logic  does  not  in  general  do,  pre- 
ferring to  leave  this  point  unexpressed,  and  tacitly  to  make 
any  correction  and  alterations  which  are  necessary).  We 
may  employ  the  sign  of  subtraction  (— )  for  the  exception 
of  one  class  from  another,  provided  the  excepted  class 
is  included  in  the  other  (common  language  appears  so  uni- 
formly to  take  this  for  granted  that  we  may  consider  it 
as  really  intending  this  limitation,  though  its  terms  do  not 
formally  imply  it).  And  we  may  employ  the  sign  of  multi- 
plication (x)  for  the  results  of  selecting  the  common  members 
of  two  classes.  (This  process  is  so  simple  that  common 
language  does  not  seem  to  have  become  loose  or  inaccurate 
here,  except  in  so  far  as  it  puts  an  occasional  intensifying  effect 
upon  the  act  of  repetition  of  comparative  terms ;  a  perfectly 
natural  intensification,  but  one  which  we  find  ourselves 
compelled  to  reject.) 

To  one  point,  which  has  been  already  noticed,  attention 


II.]  Symbols  of  classes  and  of  operations.  63 

must  be  very  persistently  directed,  as  any  vagueness  of 
apprehension  here  will  be  fatal  to  the  proper  understanding 
of  symbolic  reasoning.  It  was  seen  in  the  last  example 
that,  in  translating  a  common  phrase  into  symbols,  we  felt 
justified, '  or  rather  bound,  to  ask  ourselves  what  exactly 
that  phrase  must  be  understood  to  mean,  instead  of  just 
proceeding  to  put  it  into  symbols  as  it  stood.  We  may 
say  in  fact  that  we  were  resolved  to  give  an  idiomatic 
translation  and  not  to  resort  to  a  bald  and  literal  substitution 
of  terras.  'Lawyers  excepting  foreigners'  was  accordingly 
interpreted,  on  this  ground,  to  refer  to  what  was  left  after 
foreign  lawyers,  not  foreigners  in  general,  were  left  out 
of  account.  Accordingly  we  translated  it  into  our  symbols 
as  a  —  ab,  and  not  a  —  b,  for  we  knew  that  the  former  was 
what  we  meant.  But  in  the  converse  case,  that  is  when 
we  were  translating  back  from  the  language  of  symbols 
into  that  of  common  life,  we  had  no  right  to  do  -anything 
of  this  kind.  Symbols  have  no  tacit  limitations  or  con- 
ventional interpretations  other  than  that  which  has  been 
strictly  and  originally  assigned  to  them.  Accordingly  if  I 
meet  the  symbolic  expression  a  —  b,  where  a  stands  for  lawyers 
and  b  for  foreigners,  I  have  no  right  to  regard  this  as  a 
popular  lax  expression,  in  which  only  a  part  of  b  instead 
of  the  whole  is  to  be  subducted.  I  must  take  it  as  signi- 
fying (whatever  that  may  mean)  the  subduction  of  all 
foreigners  from  the  lawyers;  and  I  must  look  out  for,  and 
in  this  case  shall  find,  the  introduction  of  another  term 
which  will  set  matters  symbolically  straight,  by  just  neutra- 
lizing the  surplus  subduction ;  common  language  on  the 
other  hand  sets  matters  straight  by  interpreting  the  subduc- 
tion in  its  own  sense,  and  then  just  neglecting  the  required 
additional  term. 

It  comes  therefore  to  this.     "We  may  translate  into  the 


64  Symbols  of  classes  and  of  operations.         [CHAP. 

language  of  symbols  almost  as  we  please,  for  we  are  the 
only  ultimate  judges  of  what  we  really  mean  to  signify  by 
our  words.  But  having  once  done  so,  and  laid  down  rules  for 
working  with  our  symbols,  our  further  control  of  them  ceases. 
We  must  translate  out  of  these  symbols  into  the  language 
of  common  life  in  exact  accordance  with  their  assigned 
meaning.  Otherwise  we  shall  find  that  one  correction  and 
modification  after  another  will  be  called  for. 

IV.     The  only  remaining  mathematical  symbol  to  which 
we  will  at  present  direct  attention,   and  almost  the  only 
other  one  which  we  shall  have  occasion  to  adopt,  is  the  sign 
'  (=)  of  equality.    Here  too  we  must  not  trust  too  much  to 
acquired   associations.     What   this  symbol  generally  means 
in  mathematics  is  identity  (or  indistinguishable   similarity) 
in   respect   of  some   one   characteristic  only  in  the  various 
things  which  it  connects  together ;  this  characteristic  being 
in  most  cases  the  number  of  units  involved.     These   may 
be  units  of  space,  or  time,  or  mass,  or  acceleration,  or  what 
not.     Thus  in  the  case  of  a  falling  body,  v*=  2/s  means  that 
the  square  of  the  number   of  units  in  the  velocity  is  the 
same  as  twice  the  product  of  the  number  of  units  of  force 
and  space.    But  in  logic  this  is  not  so.    The  sign  of  equality 
here  indicates  absolute  identity  in  all  respects,  except  nomen- 
clature, of  two  or  more  classes.     The  identity  indeed  is  so 
complete,   that  all  that  needs  pointing  out  is  how  we  can 
talk   of  two   distinguishable   classes   in  such   a   case.     The 
answer  of  course   is  that  a   'class'   is   merely   our  way  of 
grouping  or  outlining  things,  and  is  indicated  and  retained 
by  the   imposition   of  names.     The   very  same  individuals 
therefore  may  belong  to  more  than  one  class ;  in  other  words, 
may  have   more  than   one  single  name  or  combination  of 
names  assignable   to   them.     It   is  in  this  sense  only  that 
we  can  talk  of  the  identity  of  all  the  members  of  two  or 


II.]  Symbols  of  classes  and  of  operations.  65 

more  classes.     Such  identity  is  what  we  mark  by  the  sign 
of  equality  ( =  ). 

Here,  as  in  the  case  of  our  other  symbols,  we  must  turn 
to  see  by  what  sort  of  contrivances  popular  language  succeeds 
in  conveying  its  meaning.  As  usual  it  is  vague,  and  shows 
both  defect  and  redundancy,  the  signification  being  controlled 
by  innumerable  conventions  and  implications.  One  way  of 
expressing  this  identity  is  by  mere  predication.  If  in  answer 
to  the  question,  What  are  triangles?  I  reply,  'triangles  are 
plane  figures  included  by  three  straight  lines'  I  clearly  mean 
that  every  thing  referred  to  by  the  one  name  is  also  referred 
to  by  the  other ;  that  is,  that  the  individuals  in  these  classes 
are  identical.  This  is  however  rather  a  lax  form  of  speech,  for 
the  copula  4s'  (or  'are'),  by  itself,  properly  implies  nothing 
more  than  predication.  The  stricter  form  for  expressing  this 
identity  of  classes  is  by  some  such  words  as  "consists  of",  or 
"comprises";  and  even  these  may  sometimes  need  the 
addition  of  some  other  clause  such  as  "and  includes  no 
others"  in  order  to  remove  all  ambiguity,  and  to  make  it 
plain  that  we  contemplate  a  case  of  identity  of  classes,  and 
not  merely  of  the  inclusion  of  one  class  within  another. 
Again  the  word  "means"  implies  this  identity,  and  implies 
it  somewhat  strictly.  It  does  not  properly  speaking  state 
it;  for  the  two  things  which  we  thus  connect  in  our  pro- 
position are  not  so  much  two  classes  of  individuals,  as 
the  significance  of  some  word  on  the  one  hand  and  the 
things  it  refers  to  on  the  other.  But  it  certainly  carries 
with  it  this  complete  identity  of  classes.  When  I  say  that 
'ghost'  means  a  disembodied  human  spirit,  I  imply  that 
the  class  of  things,  real  or  imaginary,  referred  to  by  one 
name  is  identical  with  that  referred  to  by  the  other  name. 

Symbolic   Logic   may  therefore   fairly  be   said  tQ   take 
an  ultra-nominalistic  view  of  this  subject.     The  expression 
V.  L,  5 


66  Symbols  of  classes  and  of  operations.    [CHAP.  n. 

x  =  y  simply  tells  us  that  the  class  of  things  of  which  x  is 
a  name  is  composed  of  the  very  same  members  as  that 
of  which  y  is  a  name.  And  xy  —  a  +  b  tells  us  that  the  class 
of  things,  of  which  both  the  names  ac  and  y  simultaneously 
hold,  is  identical  with  the  class  of  things  covered  by  the  two 
names  a  and  b.  This  implies  however,  in  strict  propriety, 
that  the  classes  a  and  b  are  mutually  exclusive  ;  if  they  are 
not  so  we  should  do  well  to  write  our  equation  in  the  form 
xy  =  «  +  b  (1  —  a)  or  xy  =  b  +  a  (1  —  b). 


CHAPTER  III. 

+ SYMBOLS  OF  OPERATIONS  (CONTINUED). 

X  * 

THE    INVERSE   OPERATION,    ~y ',    OR    SYMBOLS   OP   DIVISION. 

WE  have  now  seen  our  way  clearly  enough  to  the  per- 
formance, and  symbolic  expression,  of  three  distinct  logical 
operations  upon  classes,  viz. : — 

1.  A  direct  operation  closely  analogous  to  the  addition 
of  ordinary  arithmetic  and  algebra,  and  suitably  symbolized 
by  the  familiar  sign  (+). 

2.  The  inverse   operation  to  the  above,   and   therefore 
closely  analogous  to  subtraction,  and  which  may  be  suitably 
symbolized  by  the  sign  (— ). 

3.  A    direct     operation    very    remotely    analogous    to 
multiplication,   and   which  we   have   seen   could   (with  one 
restriction  in  respect  of  usage)  be  expressed   by  the   usual 
signs  for  that  process,  viz.  (x)  or  simple  juxtaposition  of  the 
terms. 

The  question  therefore  at  once  suggests  itself  whether 
there  may  not  be  a  fourth  operation  which  shall  be  the 
inverse  of  the  third,  as  the  second  was  of  the  first.  This 
suggestion,  it  must  be  admitted,  comes  to  us  rather  by  way  of 
the  symbols  than  by  way  of  the  actual  logical  process  itself. 

5—2 


68  The  Symbol  of  Division.  [CHAP. 

In  this  it  is  unlike  the  first  three.  As  regards  them  we 
saw  that  it  was  quite  impossible  to  think  and  speak  about 
classes  of  objects  without  having  these  three  operations  forced 
upon  our  notice :  in  fact,  they  are  so  familiar  to  us  that  our 
trouble  arises  rather  from  a  confusing  redundancy,  than 
from  any  lack,  of  phrases  to  express  them.  The  symbols 
are  therefore  an  afterthought  to  express  results  and  operations 
to  which  we  are  already  accustomed,  though  their  introduction 
is  a  powerful  means  of  economizing  time  and  thought. 

We  now  take  a  different  course.  We  might  conceive 
the  symbols  conveying  the  following  hint  to  us:  Look 
out  and  satisfy  yourselves  on  logical  grounds  whether  there 
be  not  an  inverse  operation  to  the  above.  We  do  not 
say  that  there  is  such,  though  we  strongly  suggest  it.  If 
however  you  can  ascertain  its  existence,  then  there  is  one 
of  our  number  at  your  service  appropriate  to  express  it. 
In  fact,  having  chosen  one  of  us  to  represent  your  analogue 
to  multiplication,  there  is  another  which  you  are  bound 
in  consistency  to  employ  as  representative  of  your  analogue  to 
its  inverse,  division, — supposing  it  to  exist. 

A  few  words  of  reminder  as  to  the  nature  of  an  inverse 
process1  may  not  be  out  of  place  here,  especially  as  the 
application  of  this  term,  just  above,  to  subtraction  may 
suggest  too  simple  a  notion  of  its  general  nature.  The 
relation  of  Interest  to  Discount,  as  theoretically  treated 

1  The  reader  who  can  do  so  with  arity  with    this   conception    of   an 

profit  is  strongly  recommended    to  inverse  process.    See,  for  instance, 

consult  the   works   of   some  of  the  Boole's   Differential  Equations,   ch. 

more  philosophical  mathematicians  xvi.    There  is  an  admirable  discus- 

for  a  discussion  of  the  distinction  in  sion  of  some  of  the  general  charac- 

question.     It  is  the  symbolic  Ian-  teristics  of  the  symbolic  language  of 

guage  of  mathematics   only   which  Mathematics  in  De  Morgan's  Double 

has  yet  proved  sufficiently  accurate  Algebra.     Also  in  Hankel's  Varies- 

aud  comprehensive  to  demand  famili-  ungen  Uber  die  complexen  Zahlen. 


in.]  TJte  Symbol  of  Division.  69 

In  elementary  works  on  arithmetic,  will  furnish  a  familiar 
instance.  Take  a  sum  of  £100,  and  put  interest  upon 
it  at  5  p.  c.  for  a  year ;  and  call  this  the  direct  process. 
The  result  will  of  course  be  £105.  But  now  suppose 
that  we  had  been  asked  instead  to  find  a  sum  such  that, 
when  a  year's  interest  was  added  on  to  it,  we  should  obtain 
£100,  we  should  have  been  called  upon  to  perform  the 
inverse  to  the  above.  The  result  of  course  is  £95.  4s.  9d. 
In  this  case  it  will  be  observed  that  the  inverse  process 
is  just  as  definite  as  the  direct,  that  is,  there  is  but  one 
sum  possible  such  that,  with  the  interest  added  on,  it 
shall  yield  the  given  amount.  In  mere  arithmetic  this 
is  generally  so.  To  subtract  5  from  20,  or  in  other  words 
to  find  a  sum  that,  with  5  added  on  to  it,  it  shall  become 
20,  can  only  result  in  15.  So  it  is  with  multiplication 
and  division,  and  with  the  calculation  of  logarithms,  powers, 
and  so  on. 

As  a  rule,  however,  what  are  called  inverse  operations 
are  indefinite.  Instead  of  there  being  only  one  starting  point 
such  that  the  performance  of  the  direct  process  would  carry 
us  from  it  to  the  desired  result,  there  may  be  a  plurality' 
of  such  starting  points,  or  even  an  indefinite  number  of 
them.  Thus  in  Trigonometry  the  calculation  of  the  sign 

of  a  given  angle   is  definite: — e.g.  sin  45°=-^.     But  the 

V  2 

calculation  of  the  angle  whose  sign  is  given  is  indefinite : — 

1  1  7T 

thus  sin  135°  is  also  -j=,  or  generally,  sin  *  -j=  =  (2w+|)  TT  ±  -j. 

It  is  to  this  class  of  indefinite  inverse  operations  that 
the  logical  process  which  we  indicate  by  the  sign  of  division 
will  be  found  to  belong. 

In  strictness  these   terms  direct  and  inverse  are   purely 
relative,  and  of  indifferent   application ;    that  is,  whichever 


70  TJie  Symbol  of  Division.  [CHAP. 

of  a  suitable  pair  of  processes  we  may  choose  to  call  direct, 
we  may  call  the  other  its  inverse.  But  the  fact  that  the  one 
process  is  very  frequently  definite  whilst  the  other  is  indefi- 
nite, makes  such  an  important  practical  distinction  between 
them,  that  we  are  in  the  habit  of  applying  the  term  absolutely 
to  the  latter ;  and  we  speak  of  the  inverse  process,  whilst  we 
call  the  definite  one  the  direct  process1.  It  is  in  this  sense 
that  we  shall  call  the  logical  process  which  will  be  indicated 
by  the  sign  of  division,  an  inverse  operation. 

It  should  be  remarked  that  the  inverse  rule  merely 
indicates  a  result,  giving  at  the  same  time  a  test  by  which 
that  result  is  to  be  verified,  but  that  it  does  not  describe  in 
any  way  the  process  by  which  it  is  to  be  obtained.  It 
does  not  even  assure  us  that  there  is  any  known  method 
of  obtaining  it.  It  says  in  effect:  Find  something,  which, 
when  operated  on  in  a  certain  way,  will  yield  a  certain  result, 
but  it  does  not  tell  us  how  we  are  to  set  about  finding  that 
something.  As  Boole  says  (Differential  Equations,  p.  377), 
•'It  is  the  office  of  the  inverse  symbol  to  propose  a  question, 
.  not  to  describe  an  operation.  It  is,  in  its  primary  meaning, 
interrogative,  not  directive2." 

To   find   then  the  inverse   of  xy,  that  is  of  the  direct 
operation  of  x  upon  y,  or  y  upon  x,  we  must  recall  what  that 

1  Even  where  both  processes  are  where  no  rule  of  operation  can  be 

definite,  one  of  them  may  be  much  given,    and    where   in    consequence 

more  difficult  of  performance  than  we  can  only  test  a  proposed  result 

the    other,    or   even   impracticable.  by  means  of  the  corresponding  or 

Thus  it  is  easy  enough  to  calculate  direct  process, 
the  fifth  power  of  a  given  number,  a  It  surprises  me  that  one  who 

but  we  have  no    arithmetical  rule  had  so  clearly  stated  the  nature  of 

for  calculating  a  fifth  root.    There  an  inverse  operation  in  mathematics 

Keems  some  disposition  to  apply  the  should  never  have  proposed,  so  far 

term  'inverse'  in  an  absolute  sense  as  I  know,   any  corresponding  ex- 

io  such  cases  also  as  these ;   viz.  planation  in  Logic. 


III.]  TJie  Symbol  of  Division.  71 

operation  is.  It  is,  generally  speaking,  one  of  restriction1; 
it  is  the  act  of  confining  the  attention  to  the  common 
members  of  the  two  classes  x  and  y ;  so  that  to  operate  upon 
x  by  means  of  y  is  to  restrict  the  class  x  by  exacting  the 
condition  of  being  y  also.  What  then  will  be  the  inverse 

m 

of  this,  represented  symbolically  by  -  ?     Not,  as  some  might 

«/ 

be  tempted  to  reply  at  once,  the  mere  taking-off  of  this 
^-restriction  from  a?,  but  rather  the  finding  of  a  class  such 
that,  when  the  y-restriction  is  imposed  upon  it,  it  shall  be 
brought  down  exactly  to  as. 

What  then  is  the  description  of  the  desired  class,  and 
can  it  be  determined  by  ordinary  logical  considerations  ? 
Certainly  it  can,  provided  we  set  to  work  methodically  by 
examining  all  the  possible  cases  in  order.  When  we  do 
so,  we  see  that  such  a  class  must  certainly  contain  the 
whole  of  x.  As  regards  what  is  not-ic  it  certainly  cannot 
contain  the  y  part,  (or  yx\  for,  if  it  did,  this  part  would 
not  fulfil  the  condition  of  reducing  to  x  on  imposition  of  y. 
As  regards  what  is  neither  x  nor  y,  it  may  take  as  much 
or  as  little  as  it  pleases,  that  is,  a  perfectly  indefinite  portion 
for  any  such  portion  will  satisfy  the  condition,  by  disappearing 
on  combination  with  y  and  leaving  us  x  only.  The  full 
description  therefore  of  the  desired  class  is  given  by  saying 
that  it  comprises  the  whole  of  x,  and  a  quite  uncertain  part 
of  xy,  namely  of  what  is  neither  x  nor  y.  If  we  like  to  put 

1  "We  call  it  restriction,  because  x  or  y  simply.)    Or  again,  if  x  is 

this  is  the  usual  result ;  but  in  special  already  included  in  y,  then  xy  will 

cases  the  class  thus  determined  will  be  no  narrower  than    x,    but    will 

clearly  not  be  narrowed.     For   in-  coincide  with  it;  so  that  it  is  only 

stance,  if  x  and  y  are  identical  in  y  that  is  restricted  by  the  process, 

extent,  then  xy  has  the  same  range  If  all  men  are  lung-breathers,  the 

as  either  x  or  y.     (If  '  all  x  is  all  y '  lung-breathing  men  are  no  narrower 

then  xy  is  no  more  restricted  than  a  class  than  the  men  in  general. 


72  The  Symbol  of  Division.  [CHAP. 

a  peculiar  symbol  (v)  to  represent  perfect  uncertainty,  we 
should  write  down  the  class  symbolically  as  x  -\-vxy. 

The  test  of  the  correctness  of  this  result  is  found,  as 
in  the  case  of  other  inverse  operations,  by  simply  performing 
the  direct  process  upon  it,  and  seeing  whether  we  are  thus 
led  back  to  our  original  starting  point.  Thus  if  we  multiply 
this  expression,  x  +  vxy,  by  y,  it  must  yield  x.  It  is  true  that 
at  first  sight  we  seem  to  get  a  different  result,  viz.  xy  instead 
of  x;  but  the  difference  is  soon  found  to  be  apparent 
only,  inasmuch  as  xy  and  x  are  in  this  case  the  same. 

As  the  point  here  touched  upon  is  very  important 
in  symbolical  reasoning,  I  must  call  careful  attention  to 
it,  though  its  full  significance  will  only  come  out  in  a 
future  chapter.  The  fact  is  simply  this,  that  the  very  stating 
of  such  a  problem  presupposes  a  condition,  or  makes  an 
assumption  as  to  the  mutual  relations  of  x  and  y.  To 
ask  for  a  class  such  that  on  restriction  by  y  it  shall  reduce 
to  x  necessarily  implies  that  all  x  shall  be  y,  as  otherwise 
the  process  could  not  possibly  be  performed.  If  there  were 
any  part  of  x  that  is  not  y  this  part  would  of  course  disappear 
on  restriction  by  y ;  that  is,  a  part  of  x  would  have  disappeared 
from  our  result,  whereas  the  question  demanded  that  we 
should  be  left  with  the  whole  of  x  on  our  hands  and  nothing 
else.  Accordingly  when  we.  are  asked  to  perform  the  inverse 

3C 

process  indicated  by  -  it  is  necessarily  assumed  that  'all  x  is  y,' 

i/ 

or  that  x  and  xy  are  the  same.  The  symbolic  expression 
of  the  desired  class  may  therefore  be  written  down 
indifferently  x+vxy  or  xy  +  vxy.  The  'proof  of  the 
result  is  that  either  of  these  expressions  when  multiplied 
by  y  reduces  to  xy,  that  is,  to  x,  as  the  problem  demands. 
It  will  be  observed  therefore  that  we  may  speak  of  the 

expression  -  as  standing  for  a  certain  logical  class.     It   is 
y 


in.]  The  Symbol  of  Division.  73 

particularly  necessary  to  call  attention  to  this.  I  regard 
it  as  an  essential  part  of  our  scheme  that  this  symbol, 
like  all  others  which  are  admissible  ID  to  Logic,  represents  a 
class  or  class-group  of  some  kind  or  other.  The  class  may 
be  complicated  in  its  determination,  that  is,  it  may  require 
a  number  of  terms  to  assign  it;  and  it  may,  in  certain 
directions,  be  indefinite  in'  regard  to  its  limits,  as  in  the 
above  example,  but  it  is  never  anything  else  than  a  true 
logical  class  or  conceivably  assignable  group  of  individuals. 

The  reason  for  laying  such  stress  upon  this  point  is 
that  the  contrary  view  is  very  widely  assumed.  It  is  generally 
maintained  that  the  sign  of  division  is  uninterpretable  upon 
Boole's  system,  and  by  implication  upon  any  other  system 
of  Symbolic  Logic1.  Of  course  if  we  suppose  that  the 

3T 

sign  stood  for  nothing  but  ordinary  division,  so  that  —  meant 

«y 

'divide  x  by  ?/';  then  it  must  clearly  be  admitted  that  such 
a  sign  would  be  meaningless  in  Logic.  But  then,  for 
that  matter,  so  would  acy  if  it  meant  'multiply  x  by  ?/';  for 

1  I  admitted   this   uninterpreta-  .  content  in  various  directions  to  take 

bility  myself  (in  an  article  in  Mind  them   temporarily    for    granted.    It 

for  October  1876)  more  than  I  should  seems  clear  that  Boole  himself  so 

now  be  disposed  to  do.    At  least,  I  regarded  it,   for  he    says  expressly 

could  not  then   see    my  way  with  (p.  69)  "the  chain  of  demonstration 

certainty   to   any   other   than    that  conducting  us  through  intermediate 

interrogative  explanation    which   is  steps   which    are    not   interpretable 

discussed  on    the   next    page,    and  to  a  final  result  which  is  interpre- 

therefore    assumed    that    we   must  table."     And,  further  on,  "The  em- 

admit   the  fraction  *  as   being  an  Ployment_Of  the  uninterpretable  sym- 

y  bol    tj  - 1  in  the  intermediate  pro- 

uninterpretable  stage  in  the  process  cesseg  of  Trigonometry  furnishes  an 

of  deduction.     But  that  essay  was  illustration  of  what  has  been  said." 

little    more    than    a    brief   account  (i  need  hardly  say  that  I  do  not 

of  Boole's  actual  method ;    and  not  here  accept  the  uninterpretability  of 

being  then  concerned  with  the  re-  the  symbol  \/ — T.) 
investigation  of  his  principles  I  was 


74  The  Symbol  of  Division.  [CHAP. 

Logic  makes  no  direct  use  of  either  of  these  operations. 
But  if  we  say,  as  we  should  rather  say,  Do  the  inverse 
of  that  logical  process  which  you  have  elected  to  indicate 
by  the  sign  of  multiplication,  then  it  lends  itself  readily 
enough  to  a  comparatively  simple  interpretation.  The  required 

sr 

interpretation  is  merely  this : — the  expression  -  stands  for  a 

u 

class,  viz.  for  the  most  general  class  which  will,  on  imposition 
of  the  restriction  denoted  by  y,  just  curtail  itself  to  x.  But  to 
this  expression  we  must  remember  to  attach  the  condition, 
that  this  presupposes  that  'all  x  is  y,'  as  otherwise  no 
such  class  as  that  which  is  desired  could  possibly  exist. 

The  above  is  one  way  of  approaching  these  inverse 
processes,  and  it  seems  the  most  immediate  way.  But  as 
the  conception  is  decidedly  unfamiliar,  it  will  be  well  to 
look  at  it  from  more  than  one  point  of  view.  As  it  happens 
there  is  another  way  of  being  led  into  the  use  of  fractional 
forms  in  Logic.  It  is  somewhat  more  circuitous,  but  the 
advisability  of  employing  such  forms  to  indicate  inverse 
operations  is,  if  anything,  even  more  obvious  on  this  plan 
than  on  the  one  already  examined. 

It'  has  been  shown  that  when  we  try  to  solve  the 
inverse  problem  we  find  that  it  necessarily  presupposes  a 
condition  of  relation  between  x  and  y.  Suppose  we  start 
with  the  explicit  assertion  of  a  condition,  by  asking  the 
question,  'If  z  which  is  y  is  the  same  as  x,  what  is  z  in 
general '  ?  we  shall  find  that  we  are  doing  exactly  the 
same  thing  as  asking  for  the  inverse  of  ocy.  For  express 
this  condition  symbolically  and  it  stands^  =  x.  Now  suppose 
that  we  proceed  to  treat  our  symbols  in  reliance  upon  the 
belief  that  the  process  corresponding  to  division  could  be 
performed,  or  rather,  that  when  indicated  it  could  be 
submitted  to  explanation.  We  should  go  on  to  conclude 


in.]  The  Symbol  of  Division.  75 

cc 
that     z  =-  :  in  other  words,  we  should  be  led  on  to  use  and 

y 

interpret  that  symbolic  form  which  we  have  just  been 
discussing  immediately  and  at  first  hand. 

It  is  in  this  manner,  it  may  be  remarked,  that  these 
fractional  forms  will  almost  always  originate  in  practice.  We 
have  some  term  given  to  us  qualified  or  limited  by  a  condition, 
and  we  are  asked  to  determine  all  that  we  can  about  it 
without  such  condition.  But  whether  the  process  be  called 
for  directly,  or,  as  here,  in  consequence  of  a  stated  condition, 
it  is  always  essentially  the  same.  We  have  assigned  to  us 
a  restricted  class,  and  a  restricting  class,  and  we  are  called 
upon  to  determine  with  the  utmost  generality  the  class 
which  on  combination  with  the  latter  will  reduce  to  the 
former. 

A  simple  concrete  example  will  serve  to  make  this  plain. 
For  instance,  given  that  Peers  are  the  same  as  English 
Aristocrats,  what  are  aristocrats  in  general? — the  answer  to 
be  given  of  course  in  terms  of  peer  and  English.  Aristocrats, 
when  restricted  by  the  class  English,  become  peers;  what 
can  we  say  about  them  when  subject  to  no  such  restriction  ? 
A  little  reflection  would  lead  to  one  or  two  exclusions.  They 
cannot  be  non-English  peers,  for  it  is  definitely  implied  that 
there  can  be  none  such ;  nor  again,  from  the  meaning  of  the 
terms,  can  they  be  non-aristocratic  English.  But  they  must 
certainly  include  all  the  peers.  Hence  they  can  only  be 
described  generally  as  including  'all  peers,  together  with 
a  perfectly  indeterminate  number  of  what  are  not  English 
nor  consequently  peers.'  That  is,  symbolically,  if  yz  =  x, 
then  z  =  x  +  possibly  any  portion  of  what  is  neither  x  nor  y. 
If,  as  before,  we  put  v  as  indicative  of  this  kind  and  degree  of 
indeterminateness,  we  should  write  it  z  =  x  +  vxy.  (It  is  also 
clear  here  that  x  =  xy;  that  is,  that  'peers'  are  the  same 


76  The  Symbol  of  Division.  [CHAP. 

as  'English  peers',  so  that  we  might  equally  write  it 
z=xy  +  vxy,  as  already  pointed  out.) 

We  have  gone  thus  minutely  into  the  discussion  of 
this  question,  because  the  requisite  conceptions  are  decidedly 
unfamiliar  even  to  logicians1;  but  there  can  surely  be  no 
mental  exercise  more  beneficial  than  that  of  generalizing 
to  the  utmost  the  processes  we  perform,  and  realizing  clearly 
such  distinctions  as  that  between  direct  and  inverse  operations. 
Of  course  if  the  inverse  process  of  class-expansion  were  as 
important  in  common  thought  and  speech  as  the  direct 
process  of  class-restriction  is,  it  would  become  desirable 
to  adopt  some  simple  verbal  expression  for  indicating  it. 
Just  as  we  now  write  'English  aristocrat'  as  a  brief  ex- 
pression for  the  restricted  class  common  to  the  two  classes, 

Peer 
so  we   might  write  ^ — rr-r-  as   a  brief  expression  for  the 

expanded  class  obtained  by  the  above  mentioned  process, 
namely  for  the  class  'peers,  together  with  (possibly)  any 
portion  of  what  are  neither  peers  nor  English'.  We  need 
be  no  more  suspected  of  wanting  to  divide  the  peers  by  the 
English  in  this  case  than  of  wanting  to  multiply  the  English 
by  the  aristocrats  in  the  other.  We  should  be  using  nothing 
but  convenient  linguistic  forms  for  operations  which  we  had 
occasion  to  perform.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  since  we  hardly 
ever  do  have  to  perform  the  latter  process,  except  as  a 
deliberate  logical  exercise,  no  necessity  for  the  introduction 
of  such  a  verbal  device  has  arisen.  But  we  must  not  forget 
that  our  symbols  are  simply  a  substitute  for  our  terms 

1  A   word    of  warning   may  be  must  be  introduced,  and  indeed  are 

offered  to  those  logicians  who  happen  BO,   though  in  a  very  rudimentary 

to  be  anti-mathematicians.     It  is  of  stage,  (as  will  be  shown  in  a  future 

no  UBC  rebelling  against  the  introduc-  chapter)  even  in  the  common  Logic, 

tion  of  these  processes  on  the  ground  What  is  wanted  is  that  they  should 

that   they  are   not   logical.     They  be  discussed  in  their  full  generality. 


in.]  The  Symbol  of  Division.  77 

or  words,  and  therefore  any  scheme  of  thought  and  language 

CT 

which  can  find  a  rational  use  for  the  symbolic  form  -,  might 

«7 

conceivably  find   it   desirable   to   introduce  such  a  form  as 
into  ordinary  language,  in  order  to  express  its  current 


^  —  p 

wants. 

The  mathematician  may  be  interested  in  noticing  that 

/>» 

the  logical  process  indicated  by  -  has,  in  one  respect,  more 

\J 

analogy  with  integration  than  with  division.  This  latter, 
though  an  inverse  operation  in  respect  to  multiplication, 
is  perfectly  definite  ;  it  can  only  be  answered  in  one  way 
The  direction  to  find  a  quantity  which  multiplied  by  4  shall 
yield  20,  is  just  as  definite  as  the  direction  to  multiply 
4  by  5.  Only  one  answer  is  yielded  in  either  case.  But 
the  direction  to  find  a  quantity  which  when  differentiated 
with  respect  to  x  shall  yield,  say,  a,  is  indefinite.  It  can 
only  be  described  in  the  form  ax  -4-  c,  where  c  may  be  any- 
thing not  involving  x  (fadx  =  ax  +  c).  We  are  bound,  that 
is,  to  allow  for  the  possible  existence  of  an  unknown  or 
indeterminate  surplus  term  which  will  vanish  on  the  appli- 
cation of  the  process  of  differentiation. 

The  inverse  logical  process  in  question  has  this  one 
characteristic  in  common  with  the  above,  since  it  also  yields 
an  unknown  or  indeterminate  term  which  disappears  on 
application  of  its  corresponding  direct  process,  and  for  that 
reason  has  to  be  allowed  for  and  inserted.  We  say  that 

ff* 

-  =  xy  +  vxy,  where  the  term  vxy  corresponds  to  the  constant 

c/ 

c  in  the  integration.      Whatever  c  may  be,  -7-  (ax  +  c)  =  a  ; 
and  so  whatever  vxy  may  be,  y  x  (xy  +  vxy)  =  coy,      Conse- 


78  The  Symbol  of  Division.  [CHAP. 

quently  just  as  we  write  fadx  =  ax  +  c,  so   we   must  write 


There  is  another  explanation  which  has  been  offered 
for  this  sign  of  division,  and  which  deserves  notice  here, 
as  does  also  the  corresponding  one  for  the  sign  of  multipli- 
cation. It  is  that  the  former  sign  represents  the  process 
of  logical  abstraction  and  the  latter  of  logical  determination1. 
Against  the  general  propriety  of  this  view  no  objection 
can  be  raised,  abstraction  and  determination  being  of  course 
strictly  logical  processes,  and  therefore  falling  well  within 
the  limits  of  any  logical  system.  This  explanation  is  also 
on  the  right  track,  but  it  does  not  seem  to  me  quite  to 
hit  the  mark. 

My  main  objection  to  such  an  explanation  is  that  it 
rests  too  much  upon  the  connotative  force  of  the  terms  we  use 
instead  of  appealing  solely  to  their  denotation.  (The  grounds 
for  thus  defining  our  terms  entirely  in  regard  to  their  class 
limits,  instead  of  in  regard  to  their  '  meaning',  or  the  attributes 

1  I  gather  that  this  is  Prof.  G.  B.      A  the  partial  concept  6  is  abstracted 
Halsted's  opinion  (Journal  of  Specu-      let  the  resultant  concept  be  termed 

lative  Philosophy,  Jan.  1879).  A  simi-       „      _,,  ,         „     A 

JR.     Then  we  have  R=-r  =ac  (say). 
lar  view  is  adopted  by  Schroder  (  Oper-  b 

ationskreis,  p.  2)  and  by  his  reviewer,  But  one  is  no  more  dividing  here  than 

Gtihring  (Viertel  Jahrschrift  derwiss.  one  is  multiplying  in  Composition" 

Phil.,   1878),    besides    other   recent  (J.  H.  Lambert's  Deutscher  gelehrter 

writers.  Sriefwechsel,    Letter  xxviri.    1768). 

The  explanation  in  question  how-  Lambert  himself  has  employed  the 

ever  is  much  older  than  is  commonly  same     notation    (Nov.    Act.    Enid. 

supposed,  having  been  proposed  by  1765  :  —  for  some  account  of  which 

Lambert  and  by  G.  J.  Holland,  more  scheme    in   the   particular    case   of 

than  a  century  ago,  in  the  course  of  negative  propositions  see  Chap.  xx.). 

the  intercourse  which  they  and  Plouc-  Lambert  has  also  remarked  that  De- 

quet  carried  on  together  about  the  terminations  (liestimmungen)  may  be 

principles  of  Symbolic  Logic.     Thus  'ndicated  by  the  sign  of  multiplication. 

Holland  says,  "If  from  the  concept  (Ploucquet'a  Sammlung,  p.  223.) 


in.]  The  Symbol  of  Division.  79 

they  imply,  is  discussed  more  fully  in  the  next  chapter.)  It 
is  quite  true  that  the  product  xy  may  frequently  be  described 
as  the  process  of  combining  the  attributes  connoted  by  x  and  y 
and  so  obtaining  a  limited  or  more  'determined'  class.  But 
it  seems  decidedly  better  to  say  simply  that  it  represents  the 
members  common  to  these  two  classes  x  and  y,  without 
reference  to  their  attributes ;  both  because  some  terms  may 
have  nothing  but  denotation,  and  because  where  they  have 
connotation  also,  this  latter  element  is  far  less  easily 
determined. 

Now  though  it  is  true  that  Abstraction  represents  a 
process  the  reverse  of  class  restriction,  and  so  far  corresponds 
to  our  'analogue  of  Division',  yet  it  seems  to  do  so  with  such 
limitations  and  to  presuppose  such  conditions  as  to  unfit  it  to 
be  regarded  as  general  enough  for  our  purpose.  We  cannot 
for  instance  abstract  an  attribute  from  a  term  unless  such 
attribute  is  distinctly  implied  in  the  meaning  of  the  term. 
We  can  abstract,  say,  rationality  from  man,  because  'man' 
means  'rational  animal' ;  but  there  seems  no  warrant  for 
saying  that  we  can  abstract  the  property  of  'having  two  eyes', 
or  any  other  property  not  included  in  the  connotation.  When 

cc 
we  use  the  form  -  we  assume,  it  is  true,  that  the  class  x 

is  included  in  y,  (or  that  x  =  xy\  but  this  is  a  far  more  de- 
finite and  determinable  fact  than  to  decide  whether  certain 
attributes  are  or  not  included  in  the  connotation  of  x.  To 
decide  that  'all  x  is  y'  is  often  simple  enough,  but  every  one 
knows  the  delicacy  of  deciding  what  is  implied  in  the 
'meaning'  of  x  and  of  y.  Similar  remarks  apply  to  the  logical 
process  of  Determination.  Indeed  it  is  quite  a  question 
whether,  with  Professor  Wundt  (Log.  p.  225),  we  ought  not,  in 
consistency,  to  go  the  length  of  rejecting  the  Commutative 
law  when  we  take  this  view  of  the  process.  The  determining 


80  The  Symbol  of  Division.  [CHAP. 

and  the  determined  are  not,  so  to  say,  symmetrical ;  the 
process  of  determining  A  by  B  is  not  identical  with  determin- 
ing B  by  A.  I  have  therefore  preferred  to  speak  of  'class 
restriction'  which  is  perfectly  symmetrical. 

Again,  Abstraction  as  I  understand  it,  is  limited  in 
another  way  which  unfits  it  for  our  purpose.  It  is  re- 
garded by  logicians  as  yielding  a  definite  class,  whereas  we 
require  one  which  shall  be  to  a  certain  extent  and  in  a 
certain  direction,  indefinite.  Thus  the  abstraction  of  'ration- 
ality' from  'man'  would  be  considered  to  give  'animal', 
because  man  is  defined  as  rational  animal.  But  on  our 

system  —  — r  would    represent    'rational    man    plus   an 
rational 

uncertain  portion  of  what  was  not  rational  nor  man'1.  In 
both  cases  we  are  extending  the  class  man  (or  rational  man), 
but  in  the  former  case  we  extend  it  precisely  up  to  the  limits 
of  'animal',  whereas  in  the  latter  we  confess  our  ignorance 
of  what  the  limits  of  the  extension  ought  to  be. 

All  that  I  feel  able  to  say  therefore  is  that  if  we  had 
to  select  recognized  logical  terms  to  express  the  analogues 
of  multiplication  and  division,  Determination  and  Abstraction 
would  be  the  best  for  the  purpose.  But  as  things  are,  these 
terms  are  too  much  connected  with  the  connotative  force  of 
common  terms,  and  too  much  restricted  in  their  acquired 
signification,  for  it  to  be  quite  convenient  thus  to  appropriate 
them.  To  make  them  fit  our  purpose  we  should  not  only  have 
to  confine  them  entirely  to  the  extension  of  our  classes 
irrespective  of  their  meaning  or  intension,  but  we  should 
have  to  insist  upon  assigning  to  Abstraction  an  indefiniteness 

1  Let  z  —  man,  *= rational,  t/  =  ani-  logician  before  Boole  had  conteru- 
mal.  Then  z=xy,  .'.y,  or  'animal',  plated  the  necessity  of  the  indefinite 

t    .        man  term  to  be  thus  added  to  form  the 

=    ,  i.e.  —       —  =zx  +  vzx  as  indi-  . 

x         rational  complete  result. 

catcl  above.    I  cannot  nod  that  any 


in.]  The  Symbol  of  Division.  81 

of  limitation  to  which  it  has  never  been  accustomed  in 
Logic1. 

Before  concluding  this  chapter  it  will  be  well  to  call 
attention  to  a  few  generalizations  and  extensions  in  the 
use  of  our  symbols,  which  will  be  found  to  conduce  greatly  to 
the  convenience  and  efficiency  of  their  use.  Some  of  these  are 
obvious  enough  when  pointed  out.  For  instance,  in  the 
employment  of  the  additive  sign  (+)  we  laid  it  down  that 
in  strictness  this  sign  was  only  to  be  suffered  to  connect  non- 
intersecting  classes.  There  was  indeed  an  interpretation 
which  could  be  put  upon  instances  which  did  not  comply  with 
this  regulation,  expressible  as  'counting  the  common  part 
twice  over'.  But  such  over-reckoning  was  an  arithmetical 
process  rather  than  a  logical ;  for  the  basis  of  a  logic  of  this 
description  can  only  consist  of  combinations  of  classes,  none  of 
which  ought  any  more  to  be  counted  repeatedly  than  ought 
the  subject  or  predicate  of  any  common  proposition. 

But  it  is  soon  seen  that  there  is  no  harm  in  passing 
through  such  inappropriate  expressions,  provided  we  do 
not  admit  them  into  our  final  results.  I  may  heap  up 
one  such  term  upon  another,  provided  I  put  in  some  ex- 
pression at  the  end  which  shall  neutralize  the  surplus.  In- 
stances of  this,  it  will  be  remembered,  forced  themselves  upon 
our  notice  in  the  discussions  of  the  last  chapter.  Thus  2xy 
is  unauthorized  by  itself,  and  therefore  (x  +  y]  —  Zxy  cannot,  as 
it  stands,  be  read  off  into  strict  logical  language.  But  a 

1  The  only  other  distinct  attempt  ever  of  far  too  metaphysical  and  non- 

at    the    systematic   introduction    of  logical  a  kind  (in  any  sense  of  the 

fractional  forms  into  the  treatment  word  Logic  with  which  we  are  now 

of  Logic  that  I  remember  to  have  concerned)  to  deserve  discussion  here, 

seen  is  hy  Bardili   (Grundriss    der  Some  account  of  his  system  will  be 

ersten  Logik,  (&c.,  1800).     The  sig-  found  in  Erdmann's  Geschichte  der 

nification  he  there  gives  to  the  signs  neuern  Philosophic  (in.  479). 
of  subtraction  and  division  is  how* 

V.L.  6 


82  The  Symbol  of  Division.  [CHAP. 

different  arrangement  makes  it  irreproachable,  for  it  can 
be  thrown  at  once  into  the  form  x  (1  —  y)  +  y  (1  —  x).  It  then 
becomes  '#  or  y,  tut  not  both'.  These  obvious  considerations 
are  noticed  here,  because  in  complicated  class  expressions  a 
little  trouble  devoted  to  this  kind  of  arrangement  will  often 
not  only  make  an  expression  interpretable  which  otherwise 
would  not  be  so,  but  will  greatly  facilitate  our  processes 
of  reduction  and  so  forth. 

The  same  remarks  apply  to  the  use  of  the  subtractive 
sign.  We  cannot  intelligibly  deduct  except  from  a  class 
which  obviously  contains  that  which  is  to  be  deducted.  But 
there  is  no  harm  in  beginning  with  one  or  more  negative 
terms,  provided  we  set  matters  right  before  we  have  done 
by  the  insertion  of  the  requisite  terms  from  which  they  could 
have  been  deducted.  It  should  be  observed  that  in  doing 
this  we  are  only  carrying  out  more  boldly  and  consistently 
what  common  language  has  already  recognized  as  convenient. 
Thus  we  might  say  that  'except  hotel  keepers,  muleteers  and 
such  persons,  the  Swiss  are  an  agreeable  people'  though 
in  perfect  strictness  we  could  not  'except'  from  what  had  not 
been  already  laid  down.  Symbolic  Logic  does  nothing  more 
than  cany  out  fully  and  consistently  this  right  of  regarding 
the  order  of  our  terms  as  indifferent  in  this  respect.  We 
may  group  them  as  we  please,  provided  the  aggregate  is 
capable  of  falling  into  an  intelligible  arrangement.  Thus 
xy  -f  xz  +  yz  —  Sxyz  is  really  only  another  way  of  'saying'  in 
symbols,  (1  —  x)  yz  +  (1  —  y)  xz  +  (1  —  z)  xy ;  which  is  itself  a 
way  of  saying,  in  words,  'whatever  belongs  to  two  and  two 
only  of  the  three  classes  x,  y,  and  z\  This  is  therefore  merely 
an  extension  of  the  right  which  even  common  language 
has  found  it  expedient  to  claim  in  certain  cases  and  to  a 
partial  extent. 

The  next  simplification  or  generalization  to  which  I  will 


in.]  The  Symbol  of  Division.  S3 

call  attention  is  less  obvious,  at  least  in  some  of  its 
applications.  The  reader  will  remark  that  throughout  our 

AS 

explanation    of   the    symbolic   forms    xy    and    '-    we   have 

never  said  anything  to  imply  that  sc  and  y  must  be 
merely  single  logical  terms.  We  have  spoken  of  them  as 
representing  logical  classes;  and  our  explanation,  being  a 
purely  logical  one,  will  therefore  cover  the  case  of  x  and  y 
representing  any  kind  of  logical  class.  In  the  case  of  the 
'multiplication'  of  terms,  indeed,  this  is  readily  recognized, 
and  we  have  had  examples  in  point  in  the  last  chapter.  All 
that  remains  therefore  is  to  call  attention  to  a  few  peculiar 
or  limiting  cases  which  result  from  such  an  admission. 

When  we  combine  classes  which  are  composite  in  their 
character,  that  is,  which  are  built  up  of  a  plurality  of  terms, 
we  generally,  whilst  restricting  the  actual  limits  of  the  class, 
increase  the  number  of  terms  by  which  it  is  expressed.  Thus 
(a  +  ab)  (c  +  cd),  or  the  class1  common  both  to  'a  and  b'  and 
to  'c  and  d\  is  assigned  by  the  four  elements  ac  +  acd+abc 
-1-abcd.  This  class  is  presumably  narrower  than  either 
a  +  ab  or  c  +  cd,  but  it  contains  twice  as  many  terms.  Some- 
times however  such  a  process  of  combination  will  cause  a 
number  of  elements  to  cancel  one  another  and  disappear,  and 
so  the  resultant  class  may  be  simpler  in  symbolic  expression 
as  well  as  narrower  in  actual  extent.  Thus  combine  (a  +  ac) 
with  {ace  +  ace)  and  we  have  merely  ace  ;  that  is,  in  words, 
the  class  common  to/ what  is  a,  or  neither  a  nor  c'  and  to  'what 
is  ac  and  not  e,  or  ce  and  not  a'  is  simply  'ac  that  is  not  e '. 

It  is  quite  possible  that  the  two  classes  thus  combined 
may  contain  no  common  part  at  all,  in  which  case  the  process 
of  multiplication  results  in  zero.  When  classes  are  thus 

1  The  abbreviation  a  for  (1  -  a)  will  be  ordinarily  adopted  in  future, 

6—2 


84  The  Symbol  of  Division.  [CHAP. 

mutually  exclusive,  indeed,  this  may  be  the  simplest  way  of 
proving  the  fact.  Thus,  for  instance,  (ace  +  ace)  (ace  4-  ace) 
=  0,  for  there  are  no  members  common  to  both. 

This  simple  extension  of  our  right  thus  to  combine  classes 
is  so  familiar  to  students  of  symbolic  Logic  that  it  may  be 
left  to  the  natural  course  of  example  and  discussion  to  afford 
the  requisite  illustration  and  explanation.  But  in  the  case  of 

oc 
the  inverse  operation,  -,  it  seems  to  have  been  strangely 

«7 

overlooked  that  exactly  the  same  generalized  use  is  ad- 
missible. How  important  the  saving  is,  as  compared  with 
current  modes  of  working  out  problems,  will  only  become 
apparent  in  a  future  chapter,  but  a  few  examples  may  be 
given  here  in  illustration.  Thus,  in  accordance  with  the 
general  formula, 

cc 

-  =  x  +  v  .  a-y   (with  x  =  xy} 

,   ,  dc  +  ac  ,~       -     _  N 

we  may  deduce          — •= —  -  =  ac  -f  ac  +  ve  (1  —  ac  —  ac). 

.L  *~~  6 

The  verbal  description  of  this  is  that  the  most  general  ex- 
pression of  'the  class  which,  on  restriction  by  taking  only  that 
part  of  it  which  is  not  e,  shall  just  be  reduced  to  a  only  or  c 
only  of  the  two  a  and  c',  is  'a  or  c  only,  together  with  "we 
know  not  what"  of  that  which  is  e,  but  not  a  only  or  c  only'. 

Many  other  forms  might  be  suggested,  some  of  which 
will  look  very  strange  to  those  whose  associations  with 
fractional  forms  are  confined  to  division  and  to  representation 

of  ratios.    Thus  the  form  - —     -  yields  easily  enough  0  +  v .  xy, 

1  —xy 

or  v .  xy.  The  explanation  of  this  is  simple  enough,  it 
being  merely  a  roundabout  way  of  stating  the  familiar  Law  of 
Contradiction.  We  are  asked  to  assign  the  class  such  that 
its  combination  with  1  —  xy,  or  not-ary,  shall  give  nothing. 


in.]  The  Symbol  of  Division.  85 

The  answer  of  course  is  that  'xy,  or  any  part  whatever  of 
xy'  will  be  thus  exclusive  of  'what  is  not  xy\  and  this  is 
therefore  the  most  general  assignment  of  the  class  in  question. 
The  only  caution  to  be  kept  in  view  here  is  that  both  the 
numerator  and  denominator  of  our  fractional  form  shall  be 
intelligible  class  expressions.  We  have  no  right,  for  instance, 

2C^~1/ 

to  put  together  such  a  fonn  as =  unless  we  mean  to  imply 

JC  ~™  Z 

that  both  y  and  z  are  parts  of  x.  A  formula  will  indeed  be 
given  in  a  future  chapter  which  is  competent  to  deal  with 
such  expressions  as  these,  and  to  force  an  explanation  out  of 
them.  But  so  long  as  we  confine  ourselves,  as  at  present,  to 
simple  logical  explanations,  we  must  not  try  to  make  the 
expression  work  beyond  the  limits  within  which  we  can 
clearly  accept  and  interpret  it.  So  long  as  x  and  y  are  logical 

*yt 

classes,  but  only  so  long,  may  we  regard  -  as  equivalent  to 

3 

x  +  v.xy,  and  as  implying  also  the  condition  x  =  xy.  If, 
within  these  limits,  we  find  the  formula  lead  to  falsity  or 
absurdity,  it  can  only  be  that  we  were  asking  a  question 
which  was  in  itself  in  some  way  false  or  absurd. 

It  may  be  pointed  out  here  that,  in  Logic,  any  fraction 
and  its  reciprocal  will  be  found  to  yield  the  same  form.    Thus 

X        7/ 

-  =  -  =  xy  +  v  xy.      Of  course  their  value  is  not  the  same, — 

y    x 

that  is,  in  other  words,  their  logical  import, — for  the  conditions 

/yt 

yielded  respectively  by  them  are  different.  In  -  the  condition 

is  xy  =  0,  and  in  -  it  is  xy=  0 ;  that  is,  the  relations  of  x  and  y  to 

each  other  are  different  according  as  one  or  other  of  these 
fractions  is  written  down  and  an  explanation  called  for  it. 
The  only  remaining  generalization  which  we  shall  find  it 


86  The  Symbol  of  Division.  [CHAP. 

convenient  to  introduce  into  Logic  is  the  mathematical  term 
'function '.  There  is  nothing  in  this  which  should  raise  any 
alarm.  We  are  doing  absolutely  nothing  more  than  making 
use  of  a  somewhat  wider  generalization  of  the  same  kind  as 
those  with  which  the  ordinary  logician  is  already  familiar, 
and  which  form  one  of  the  main  distinctions  between  his 
language  and  that  of  common  life.  We  are  accustomed  to 
put  an  X  or  a  Y  to  stand  not  for  this  or  for  that  subject  or 
predicate  only,  but  for  subjects  and  predicates  generally ;  and 
so  we  put  Barbara  or  AAA  to  stand  for  one  particular  form 
of  argument  whatever  its  matter  may  be.  This  does  well 
enough  for  such  simple  terms  and  propositions  as  the  common 
Logic  mostly  has  to  do  with ;  but  when  we  come  to  grapple 
with  more  complicated  terms  and  propositions  we  shall  find 
a  need  for  some  corresponding  advance  in  our  technical 
language.  We  want  some  kind  of  expression  which  shall 
stand  for  any  class-group  or  class-equation,  however  com- 
plicated these  may  be,  provided  only  they  involve  some  given 
term  as  one  of  their  constituent  elements. 

For  instance : — 'Every  XY  which  is  either  A  or  B'  'No 
AB  which  is  not  X,  is  Y' : — here  we  have  respectively  a  class- 
group  and  a  class-equation,  both  of  which  involve  the  term  X, 
They  are  of  course  already  in  what  is  called  an  abstract  form, 
as  compared  with  the  concrete  language  of  ordinary  life  ;  but 
inasmuch  as  they  both  involve  the  common  element  X,  we 
may  make  a  higher  abstraction  out  of  them  in  respect  of  this 
element.  We  do  this  in  calling  them  both  'functions  of  X'. 
Writing  them  respectively,  xy  (a  +  ab),  abxy  =  0,  we  may  use 
the  common  form/  (x)  to  stand  for  them  both.  We  can,  of 
course,  mark  the  fact  that  the  latter  is  an  equation  by  writing 
it/  (x)  =  0,  and  this  it  will  generally  be  convenient  to  do. 

Technical  language  is,  it  must  be  remembered,  called  for 
by  technical  uses.  The  reason  why  we  want  a  common  form 


in.]  The  Symbol  of  Division.  87 

for  such  various  expressions  is  to  be  sought  in  the  fact  that 
we  propose  to  subject  them  all  alike  to  certain  common 
operations.  Ordinary  Logic  finds  no  occasion  to  do  this,  and 
therefore  finds  none  to  take  note  of  that  common  element  in 
them  which  gives  ground  to  such  operations,  and  which  we 
indicate  by  the  expression  f  (x)  or  'function  of  x '. 

This  necessity  for  the  performance  of  common  operations  is 
of  course  the  reason  why  we  call  such  an  expression  a  function 
of  x  rather  than  of  anything  else.  It  will  commonly  involve 
other  terms  besides  x,  and  therefore  be  a  function  of  them 
also.  The  sole  reason  why  we  single  out  one  element  and 
regard  it  as  f  (x),  is  that  cc,  and  not  one  of  the  other  terms, 
is  the  common  element  in  virtue  of  which  we  propose  to 
operate  upon  it  and  to  which  alone  therefore  we  pay  attention 
for  the  time  being. 

It  may  be  added  that,  on  the  view  adopted  in  this  book, 
/  (x)  never  stands  for  anything  but  a  logical  class.  It  may 
be  a  compound  class  aggregated  of  many  simple  classes ;  it 
may  be  the  class  indicated  by  certain  inverse  logical 
operations ;  it  may  be  composed  of  two  groups  of  classes 
declared  equal  to  one  another,  or  (what  is  the  same  thing) 
their  difference  declared  equal  to  zero,  that  is,  a  logical 
equation.  But  however  composed  or  derived,  f  (x)  with  us 
will  never  be  anything  else  than  a  general  expression  for  such 
logical  classes  of  things  as  may  fairly  find  a  place  in  ordinary 
Logic. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

ON  THE  CHOICE  OF  SYMBOLIC  LANGUAGE. 

IN  the  last  two  chapters  we  have  shown  how  the  familiar 
symbols  of  mathematics  may  be  used  to  express  logical 
relations  and  processes.  The  ease  and  accuracy  with  which 
they  do  this  will  to  many  minds  afford  a  complete  justifica- 
tion of  their  employment  for  this  purpose,  but  as  repeated 
and  violent  protests1  have  been  raised  in  various  quarters 
against  introducing  them  into  Logic,  a  short  chapter  of  j  usti- 
fication  may  conveniently  be  inserted  here. 

That  a  language  of  symbols  of  some  kind  or  other  is 
needed  must  I  think  be  taken  for  granted.  Such  a  language 
indeed  is  already  admitted  into  the  ordinary  logic  just  as  far 
as  that  science  is  supposed  to  need  it :  and,  on  the  same 
ground,  if  more  of  it  is  wanted  more  of  it  must  be  called  for. 
If  we  are  to  handle  such  classes,  for  instance,  as  that  composed 
of  "A  which  may  be  both  B  and  (7,  but  not  one  only  of  the 
two  except  when  it  is  either  D  or  EOT  both",  what  arguments 
can  be  urged  for  trying  to  work  with  this  cumbrous  verbal 
expression  except  such  as  would  tell  equally  against  con- 
densing some  verbose  statement  into  the  form  'All  X  is 
Y  ?  And  as  the  reader  knows  by  now,  what  we  have  to  be 
1  e.g.  Spalding'a  Logic,  p.  60.  T.  S.Baynea's  New  Analytic,  p.  160. 


CHAP.  IV.]      On  the  Choice  of  Symbolic  Language.  89 

prepared  to  do  is  to  manipulate  groups  of  terms  such  as  that 
just  offered.  Of  course  if  we  had  only  proposed  to  go  over 
the  familiar  ground  again  in  new  words,  and  were  asking  for 
a  fresh  array  of  symbols  in  which  to  exhibit  Conversion, 
Opposition,  the  Syllogism,  and  so  forth,  such  a  demand  might 
reasonably  be  protested  against.  It  is  indeed  true  that  most 
of  the  earlier  symbolists  did  not  propose  to  do  more  than 
this,  but  considered  that  the  transformations  they  effected 
would  receive  their  crowning  justification  when  they  could 
show  how  we  might  go  in  detail  through  all  the  moods  of  the 
syllogism  and  exhibit  them  clothed  in  symbolic  language. 
Probably  many  logicians  still  believe  that  nothing  more  than 
this  has  even  yet  been  attempted,  but  it  would  really  be  a 
waste  of  time  to  stop  to  argue  deliberately  against  such  a 
misapprehension  as  this,  after  what  has  been  said  in  the  pre- 
ceding chapters. 

The  question  therefore  is  considerably  narrowed.  Our 
choice  lies  between  taking  the  language  of  mathematics  as 
far  as  this  will  serve  our  purpose,  or  inventing  a  new  one,  for 
there  is  certainly  no  existent  rival  to  the  former.  That  is, 
there  is  no  complete  system  of  symbolic  language,  devised 
for  any  other  science,  which  would  practically  answer  our 
purpose.  (The  notation  of  chemistry  has,  I  presume,  no 
advocates  here.)  It  must  be  admitted  that  the  choice  here 
is  not  altogether  without  difficulty. 

The  prevalent,  objections  to  employing  mathematical 
symbols  rest  mainly  upon  an  entire  misapprehension  of  their 
nature  and  existent  range  of  interpretation.  Something  has 
been  already  said  on  this  subject  in  the  Introductory  Chapter, 
so  that  a  few  words  will  suffice  here.  The  objectors  who 
protest  against  the  introduction  "of  relations  of  number  and 
quantity1"  into  logic,  and  who  reject  the  employment  of  the 
1  Spalding's  Logic,  p.  50. 


90  On  the  Choice  of  Symbolic  Language.        [CHAP. 

sign  (  +  )  "unless  there  exists  exact  analogy  between  mathe- 
matical addition  and  logical  alternation1",  cannot,  it  would 
appear,  get  rid  of  the  notion  that  mathematics  in  general  are 
of  the  nature  of  elementary  arithmetic.  We  must  again 
remind  the  reader  of  the  wide  range  of  interpretation  which 
already  exists  within  the  domain  of  mathematics :  how  the 
sign  ( -f  )  starting  with  addition  in  ordinary  arithmetic,  has, 
in  algebra,  come  to  cover  the  case  of  subtraction ;  and  has 
continued  to  extend  its  range  of  application  till  in  Quaternions, 
A  and  B  indicating  both  the  magnitude  and  the  direction  of 
two  steps,  A  +  B  will  indicate  the  net  result  produced  by 
taking  successively  first  one  and  then  the  other  of  these 
steps.  How  again  the  sign  (  x  )  has  similarly  extended  its 
interpretation;  beginning  with  true  multiplication  of  integers, 
it  has  embraced  fractions  and  negative  quantities  within  its 
rules,  and  has  continued  extending  its  signification  till  it  too 
has  become  transformed  in  Quaternions.  So  that  finally 
Ay.  B  may  mean,  not  multiplication,  but  amongst  other 
things  a  certain  rotation  of  a  line  through  an  angle.  Simi- 
larly the  sign  (  =  ),  when  applied  to  vectors,  denotes  both 
equality  of  length,  and  parallelism  of  direction2. 

1  Jevons's  Principles  of  Science,  tion  might  be  laid  down.    The  fol- 

p.  68.  lowing  apparently  comprise  the  prin- 

3  The  mathematical  reader  is  re-  cipal  systems  now  in  use: — 

commended  to  consult  a  paper  by  (1)    The   commutative  principle 

Mr  Bpottiswoode  on  "  Some  recent  might  be  adopted,  so  that 

generalizations  of  Algebra"  (Proc.  of  ilt  to, ...  being  the  units,  *1t3  =  t2t1; 

London  Math.  Soc.  Vol.  iv.  p.  147).  and  the  actual  value  of  such  a  product 

He  there  says :  might  be  the  subject  of  any  other  arbi- 

"In  the  majority  of  systems  pro-  trary  assumptions.     Such  an  algebra 

posed,  the  distributive  and  associa-  might  be  called  commutative, 

live   principles    have   been  adopted  (2)    The   commutative  principle 

[certain  exceptions  being  mentioned  being  suspended,  the  following  rela- 

even  here]  and  starting  from    this  tion  might  be  adopted:  t1ta=-t2ti, 

basis  a  variety  of  laws  of  multiplica-  expressive  of  what  might  be  called 


IV.]  On  the  CJwice  of  Symbolic  Language.  91 

It  is  clear  that  these  considerations  decidedly  blunt  the 
edge  of  much  of  the  objection  in  question.  It  is  no  longer  a 
case  of  shifting  a  term  or  sign  from  one  precise  and  rigid 
signification  to  another,  but  that  of  extending  in  a  new 
direction  the  signification  of  signs  which  have  already 
proved  themselves  able  and  willing  to  undergo  a  succession  of 
very  important  extensions. 

Another  objection,  and  in  some  respects  a  more  reason- 
able one,  against  the  practices  of  the  symbolic  logician,  would 
be  directed  not  at  the  interpretation  he  puts  upon  the  symbols 
but  at  his  meddling  with  their  actual  laws  of  operation.  It 
may  be  urged  that  we  do  not  use  these  mathematical  signs 
consistently,  that  is,  that  we  put  special  restrictions  upon 
their  laws  of  operation  which  are  not  admitted  in  mathe- 
matics : — that,  for  instance,  we  maintain  that  #2,  as  also  every 
higher  power  of  x,  is  the  same  as  x  itself,  and  that,  as  a  con- 
sequence of  this,  we  cannot  adopt  the  plan  of  striking  out 
common  factors  from  the  numerator  and  denominator  of  a 
fraction.  This  is  so :  we  do  depart  in  these  respects  from  the 
ordinary  practice  of  the  mathematician  in  most  of  his  depart- 
ments. But  here  again  a  little  reflection  upon  what  is 
already  admitted  somewhere  or  other  in  mathematics  will 
weaken  such  an  objection.  Do  we  depart  wider  from  the 
primary  traditions  of  arithmetic  than  the  Quaternionist  does? 
It  is  a  question  if  we  can  be  said  to  depart  so  far,  for  at  least 
we  still  adhere1  to  the  'commutative  law'  that  xy  =  yx, 
whilst  he  finds  it  necessary  to  reject  it  and  assigns  a  different 
interpretation  to  these  two  expressions.  With  him  they  are, 
generally  speaking,  not  equivalent. 

the    alternative    principle".      Two  shows  the  caution,  and  even  timidity, 
other  possible  cases  are  then  men-  which  is  becoming  in  an  amateur, 
tioned.  1  Wundt  (Logik,p.  225)  has  been 
In  comparison  with  all  this  free  already  mentioned  as  a  solitary  ex- 
handling  the  symbolic  logician  really  ception  here.    See  Ch.  in.  p.  80. 


92  On  the  Choice  of  Symbolic  Language.       [CHAP. 

There  being  therefore  already  so  considerable  a  license  in 
these  respects  admitted  amongst  mathematicians,  there  is  not 
so  much  fear  that  the  logician  will  unsettle  the  minds  of  men, 
or  introduce  misleading  associations,  if  he  decides  to  employ 
their  symbolic  language  in  the  way  which  he  thinks  will 
suit  him  best.  It  is  a  mere  balance  of  opposite  advantages, 
there  being  something  to  be  said  for  and  against  each  side. 
It  must  be  remembered  that  there  are  but  very  few  signs 
which  we  find  it  convenient  to  borrow:  in  fact  only  the 
following: — four  symbols  for  operations,  viz.  -f,  — ,  x,  -f-;  the 
sign  of  equality  viz.  (  =  )  and  two  symbols  for  quantities, 
viz.  1  and  0 : — these  being  for  the  most  part  just  those  oldest 
and  most  general  symbols  which  have  already  undergone  the 
widest  transfer  or  generalization  of  interpretation.  The 
abbreviated  expression  for  function,  viz.  (/),  need  hardly 
be  formally  included  in  the  list,  since  we  can  scarcely  be  con- 
sidered to  change  or  extend  its  signification. 

The  reason  which  makes  me  decide  in  favour  of  the  plan 
of  employing  the  symbols  of  mathematics  is  briefly  this. 
The  introduction  of  any  new  set  of  symbols  is  in  itself  a  very 
serious  evil.  Symbolic  language  ought  if  possible  to  be  used 
with  mechanical  facility,  which  presupposes  a  considerable 
amount  of  practice.  Every  one  who  has  learnt  a  system  of 
shorthand  knows  what  a  length  of  time  elapsed  before  it 
ceased  actually  to  frustrate  its  only  object  by  causing  rather 
than  avoiding  trouble.  Now  the  interpretation  of  our  symbols 
is  only  occasional  whilst  their  employment  is  by  comparison 
constant.  Interpretation  is  demanded  at  the  primary  step  of 
writing  down  our  data,  and  at  the  final  step  of  reading  off 
the  answer,  but  in  all  the  path  between  the  start  and  the 
finish  we  are  not  really  obliged  to  think  of  interpreting  our 
formulae  at  all.  Accordingly  when  the  alternative  is  before 
us  of  inventing  new  symbols,  or  only  assigning  some  new 


iv.]  On  the  Choice  of  Symbolic  Language.  93 

meaning  to  old  and  familiar  ones,  experience  and  reason  seem 
decisively  in  favour  of  the  latter  plan.  Certainly  the  experi- 
ence of  the  mathematicians  appears  to  tell  in  this  direction, 
which,  ought  to  count  for  much.  When  they  have  to  denote 
a  new  conception  or  a  new  law  of  operation,  of  course  they 
may  want  a  new  symbol  for  it.  But  when  the  law  of  opera- 
tion is  the  same,  or  even  partially  the  same,  they  continue  to 
use  the  old  symbol  even  though  the  signification  may  have 
undergone  a  very  considerable  change.  To  take  then  one  of 
the  simplest  instances :  which  is  easiest,  to  use  the  familiar 
sign  (  +  )  as  we  have  always  been  accustomed  to  use  it, 
bearing  in  mind,  as  we  do  so,  that  x  +  y  does  not  mean 
addition  of  a  toy  (an  early  prejudice  which  the  mathematician 
has  long  laid  aside),  or  to  invent  a  new  symbol  ( -I- )  where 
we  have  to  learn  anew  both  the  laws  of  operation  and  the 
signification  ? 

Whilst  then  we  shift  the  signification  of  the  symbols 
we  retain  their  laws  of  operation  as  far  as  possible  un- 
changed. Indeed  the  only  change  we  venture  to  make  is 
of  the  nature  of  special  limitation  rather  than  of  actual 
alteration.  Thus  to  identify  xz  with  as  is  admissible  in  cer- 
tain cases  even  in  mathematics,  for  instance  when  x  =  1 ; 
and  to  forbid  division  by  x  is  also  admitted,  in  case  x  =  0. 
We  can  hardly  be  said  therefore  to  transgress  universally 
binding  usage.  As  an  illustration  of  what  must  be  called  the 
false  use  of  such  symbols  a  practice  which  has  the  sanction  of 
several  good  names  must  be  noticed,  that,  namely,  of  em- 
ploying +  and  —  to  mark  respectively  affirmation  and  denial. 
The  analogy  on  which  this  usage  is  founded  is  very  slight, 
amounting  indeed  to  little  more  than  the  fact  that  two 
denials  (in  the  case  of  contradictions)  result  in  re-affirmation, 
just  as  ( —  )  twice  repeated  yields  (  + ).  But  the  commutative 
law  is  here  rejected,  for  if  X  +  Y  means  that  'All  X  is  Y 


94  On  the  Choice  of  Symbolic  Language.      '[CHAP. 

we  must  clearly  refuse  to  identify  this  with  Y+  X.  Again 
if  we  express  'if  S,  then  not  P'  by  (+S  —  P),  we  might  be 
tempted,  following  familiar  usage,  to  regard  this  as  equiva- 
lent to  (—  P  +  8)  which  would  be,  of  course,  to  fall  into  a 
familiar  fallacy1.  The  fact  is,  as  was  abundantly  illustrated 
in  the  preceding  chapters,  that  the  contrast  between  affirma- 
tion and  negation,  important  as  it  is  on  a  predicative  view  of 
logic,  becomes  quite  superficial  when  we  adopt  a  thorough- 
going class  view.  We  have  therefore  no  right  here  to  use 
such  a  pair  of  symbols  as  (  +  )  and  (  —  )  to  indicate  it. 

Those  who  propose  a  new  notation  commonly,  and  not 
unnaturally,  assume  that  it  is  to  supersede  all  others.  But 
those  who  approach  it  as  strangers  know  that  the  odds  are 
decidedly  that  it  will  only  prove  one  more  of  those  many 
attempts  which  perplex  and  annoy  the  lecturer,  historian, 
and  critic.  Hence  we  may  fairly  use  the  argument,  dear  to 

1  As  indicated  above,  the  actual  been  puzzled  by  Hamilton's  symbolic 
usage  here  is  various.  Maimon  equivalent  for  the  Law  of  Contradic- 
made  +  and  -  equivalent  respective-  tion.  "  This  law  is  logically  ex- 
ly  to  '  is '  and  '  is  not ',  so  that '  a  + 1 '  pressed  in  the  formula,  — what  is  con- 
meant  *o  is  &',  and  '0-6'  meant  tradictory  is  unthinkable.  A  =  not. 
'a  is  not  b'.  As  Darjes  used  them  .4=0,  or  A-A  =  0"  [Logic,  i.  81: — 
they  might  be  best  rendered  by 'posit'  Is  this,  by  the  way,  an  attempt  at 
and  'sublate',  for  he  affixed  them  to  rendering  a  passage  in  Bachmann 
each  term.  Thus  +S-P  meant  (Logik,  p.  43),  "Keine  position  und 
'posit  S  and  we  sublate  P'.  Dro-  negation,  setzen  und  aufheben,  (  +  .4 
bisch's  use  is  sounder,  as  he  seems  -A),  in  einem  Denkakte  unmittelbar 
to  confine  them  to  mark  propositions  verbunden,  vernichten  sich,  weil  sie 
aa  wholes:  thus  +«, -u,  +p, -p,  einander  rein  entgegengesetzt  sind 
stand  respectively  for  what  are  com-  (.4-4=0)"?].  Mr  Chase  again  ( First 
monly  indicated  by  A,  E,  It  O.  But  Logic  Book)  making  +  and  -  do  duty 
in  all  cases  alike  the  usage  seems  to  for  affirmation  and  negation  employs 
me  faulty  and  misleading.  the  negative  particle  as  well,  writing 

For  downright  grotesque  perver-  e.g.,  Cesare,  thus: 
eion  of  mathematical  terms  some  of  No  Z  -  Y, 

the  non-  mathematical  logicians  are  All  X+Y, 

unequalled.    Many  readers  must  have  No  X  -  Z. 


On  the  Choice  of  Symbolic  Language.  95 

those  in  authority,  that  if  we  loosen  the  sanctions  of  orthodoxy 
heresies  will  multiply.  Only  those  whose  professional  employ- 
ment compels  them  to  study  a  number  of  different  works 
.have  any  idea  of  the  bewildering  variety  of  notation  which  is 
already  before  the  world.  A  new  notation  is  not  like  a  new 
fact  or  theory  from  which,  so  to  say,  the  passer-by  may  learn 
something.  It  is  meant  for  habitual  use,  and  thus  practically 
aims  at  the  exclusion  of  all  rivals.  No  doubt  it  would  be 
rank  intolerance  to  forbid  such  new  attempts,  but  an  attitude 
of  slight  social  repression  towards  them  may  serve  to  check 
too  luxuriant  a  growth  of  new  proposals1. 

There  are  two  subordinate  advantages  in  employing  an 
already  widely-used  and  familiar  set  of  symbols.  One  of 
these  is  in  their  occasional  suggestiveness.  Take  for  instance 
that  inverse  process  to  class-restriction  which  was  explained 
in  the  last  chapter.  It  is  not  by  any  means  an  obvious 
process,  and  though  perfectly  intelligible  in  itself  it  is  not  at 
all  likely  that  it  would  have  suggested  itself  to  the  mind 
except  by  way  of  the  symbols.  We  are  very  familiar  with 

1  In  order  to  gain  some  idea  of  a        ax  (Shroder), 

what  has  been   from  time  to  time1  a      -a  (Segner), 

proposed  in  this  way,  the  reader  may  tt       na  (Maass), 

turn    to    the    final  chapter  of  this  whilst    the    same    symbols: — capital 

volume  where  he  will  find  a  detailed  and  small  letters  respectively : — have 

account  of  over  twenty  distinct  nota-  been  made  to  do  duty  for  the  fol- 

tions  for  that  simplest  of  all  proposi-  lowing  meanings : 
tions : — the  Universal  Negative^  The  class  A  and  its  contradictory 

The  following  illustrations  may  (De  Morgan,  Jevons), 
be  given  here.     The  same  meaning, —  The  class  A  distributed  and  un- 

the  distinction  between  a  term  and  distributed  (Ploucquet), 
its  contradictory ; — has  been  variously  The    concept  and    its  extension 

symbolized  as  follows:  (Maass,  Logik,  p.  100), 

A        a  (De  Morgan,  Jevons),  The  determined  and  the  determin- 

a         a  (Boole,  E.  Grassmann),  ing  concepts  (Wundt,  Logik,  p.  223), 
a         a'  (Delboeuf,  Maccoll),  Universal  and  particular  proposi- 

a  1-a  (Boole),  tions  (Gergonne). 


96  On  the  Choice  of  Symbolic  Language.        [CHAP. 

the  particular  inverse  process  of  Division  in  relation  to 
Multiplication,  and  when  we  use  the  latter  sign  to  denote 
class-restriction  the  enquiry  seems  forced  upon  us  to  deter- 
mine what  there  is  in  Logic  corresponding  to  the  former. 
The  moment  we  write  down  xy  =  z,  we  can  hardly  refrain 

ty 

from  writing  also  x  =  -,  and  then  the  interpretation  of  the 

latter  is  forced  upon  us.  Every  mathematician  knows  what 
a  fertile  source  of  new  theorems  is  the  attempt  to  ascertain 
the  analogues  to  such  and  such  a  familiar  process  in  some 
other  branch  of  analysis.  Of  course  we  must  not  permit  such 
hints  as  these  to  be  anything  more  than  hints,  for  every 
logical  rule  must  be  established  on  its  own  proper  grounds, 
but  even  hints  may  be  of  great  value. 

It  may  be  remarked  that  the  analogy  just  mentioned  was 
seized  from  the  first  by  logical  symbolists ;  (as  was  shown,  in 
the  last  chapter,  in  the  case  of  Lambert  and  Holland).  As 
they  interpreted  the  step  indeed,  viz.  as  denoting  Abstraction, 
the  logical  process  was  one  which  was  already  quite  familiar, 
so  that  very  likely  the  symbolic  step  was  first  suggested  and 
justified  by  the  logical.  As  we  feel  bound  to  interpret  it, 
however,  viz.  in  respect  of  extension  or  denotation,  the  case 
is  very  different.  As  just  remarked,  the  step  is  not  an  easy 
one  to  grasp,  and  it  is  very  doubtful  if  we  should  have  been 
able  to  see  our  way  to  it  without  the  help  of  the  slight 
pressure  in  the  right  direction  afforded  by  our  wish  to  justify 
and  explain  a  familiar  symbolic  procedure. 

Again  it  seems  really  important  to  impress  upon  the 
mind  of  the  student  certain  characteristics  of  symbolic 
language.  The  distinction  between  the  mere  laws  of  opera- 
tion, and  the  interpretation  of  them,  is  apt  to  be  overlooked, 
and  this  will  very  likely  be  still  more  the  case  if  we  insist 
upon  introducing  a  new  notation  for  one  special  class  of 


iv.j  On  the  Choice  of  Symbolic  Language.  97 

interpretations.  We  may  thus  lose  our  appreciation  both  of 
the  generalized  extent  over  which  the  same  laws  of  operation 
can  prevail,  and  the  very  various  though  connected  signi- 
fications which  this  extent  of  application  will  serve  to 
cover. 

Various  other  ways  have  been  adopted  in  order  to  prevent 
any  confusion  between  the  special  logical  usage  of  symbols 
and  the  ordinary  mathematical  usage  of  the  same,  and  yet 
not  to  lose  sight  of  the  common  properties.  Thus  Mr  C.  S. 
Peirce  has  proposed1  to  differentiate  the  logical  use  by  the 
insertion  of  a  distinguishing  mark  (a  comma  underneath). 
Instead  of  writing  a  •]•  a  =  a,  with  Professor  Jevons,  in  order 
to  represent  the  fact  that  logical  'addition'  does  not  double 
the  number  of  the  common  members,  he  writes  it  a  +  a  =  a. 
This  would  be  interpreted  to  mean  that  'the  (logical)  ad- 
dition, or  aggregation,  of  a  to  a  is  (logically)  equivalent 
to  the  class  taken  simply.'  So  again,  as  a  consequence,  if 
we  know  that  a  and  b  are  mutually  exclusive  we  have  the 
formula  a  +  b  =  a  +  b ;  for  in  this  case  the  results  of  the  logical 
and  the  arithmetical  additions  correspond. 

Or  again,  an  entirely  new  set  of  symbols  might  be 
introduced,  intended  to  be  applied  not  to  logic  separately  in 
contrast  with  mathematics,  but  made  so  general  as  designedly 
to  cover  both.  Among  those  who  have  actually  offered 
something  in  this  way,  of  a  logical  kind,  may  be  noticed 
H.  Grassmann.  He  proposes  the  symbol  ^  to  denote  'con- 
nection' (verkniipfung)  in  general,  and  ^  to  denote  its 
inverse,  so  that  a  x-x  b  denotes  the  form  which  when  joined 
by  ^  to  b  will  yield  a.  He  does  not  indeed  in  his  definition 
refer  to  anything  outside  the  domain  of  mathematics,  but  his 
language  seems  intended  to  be  perfectly  general :  "By  a 

1  (Proc.  of  American  Acad.  of  Arts  and  Sc.  1867.) 
V.  L.  7 


08  On  the  Choice  of  Symbolic  Language.        [CHAP. 

general  science  of  symbols  [Formenlehre]  we  understand 
that  body  of  truths  which  apply  alike  to  every  branch  of 
mathematics,  and  which  presuppose  only  the  universal  con- 
cepts of  similarity  and  difference,  connection  and  disjunction" 
(Ausdehnungslehre,  p.  2).  As  a  result  of  this  generalized 
use  we  shall  have  to  notice,  in  another  chapter,  a  curious 
anticipation,  in  certain  respects,  of  one  detail  in  Boole's  pro- 
cedure. 

It  is  to  this  generalized  symbolic  language,  such  as  we 
are  here  employing  it,  that  some  writers  have  applied,  by  a 
revival  of  an  old  word,  the  term  Algorithm.  Thus,  for 
example,  Delbceuf  entitles  his  work,  written  on  the  same 
kind  of  subject  as  this,  "Logique  algorithmique."  There  is 
no  objection  whatever  to  the  word,  but  I  have  preferred 
to  speak  of  "Symbolic  Logic"  as  being  more  familiar  in  our 
language  :  'symbolic*  as  I  understand  it,  being  almost  exactly 
the  equivalent  of  'algorithmic.' 

There  is  also  another  old  term  which  will  be  familiar  to 
readers  of  Leibnitz  and  Wolf, — characteristic, — which  seems 
to  me  to  cover  much  the  same  ground  as  Algorithmic  and 
Symbolic  :  the  word  is  thus  defined  by  Wolf  (Psychologia 
empirica,  §  294  seq.)  "Ars  characteristica  appellatur  ea  quse 
explicat  signorum,  in  rebus  aut  earundem  perceptionibus 

denotandis,  usum.  Ars  hoec  adhuc  in  desideratis  est." "In 

Algebra  istiusmodi  signa  habemus  pro  quantitatibus ;  sed 
desiderantur  talia  in  philosophia  pro  rerum  qualitatibus."... 
"Ars  ilia  qusG  docet  signa  ad  inveniendum  utilia  et  modum 
eadem  combinandi  eorumdemque  combinatlonem  certa  lege 
variandi,  dicitur  Ars  characteristica  combinatoria.  Vocattir 

a  Leibnitzio  etiam  speciosa  generalis." "Si  quis  mente 

perpendit  qualis  numerorum  in  Arithmetica,  magnitudinum 
in  Algebra,  syllogismorum  in  Logica,  notio  prsesupposita 
fuerit  antequam  characteristica  ad  numeros  magnitudines  et 


iv.]  On  the  Choice  of  Symbolic  Language.  99 

syllogismos  applicari  potuerit,  et  quamdiu  in  Arithmetica 
atque  Algebra  commodi  desiderati  fuerunt  characteres;  is 
difficultatem  artis  characteristics  combinatorics  generalis  haud 
difficulter  sestimabit." 

These  extracts  seem  to  indicate  a  tolerably  clear  appreci- 
ation of  the  end  to  be  aimed  at  in  constructing  a  generalized 
symbolic  logic  but  the  discussions  on  this  subject  are  much 
mixed  up  with  the  wider  question  of  a  general  philosophical 
language.  As  the  reader  very  likely  knows,  this  problem 
was  keenly  discussed  in  the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth 
centuries  and  occupied  the  attention  of  Leibnitz  more  or  less 
throughout  his  life.  Speaking  from  a  very  slight  acquaint- 
ance1, I  should  say  that  what  was  mostly  contemplated  by 
the  writers  in  question  was  more  what  we  should  now  call 
either  a  universal  language,  or  a  general  system  of  shorthand, 
than  a  logic.  I  mean  that  they  do  not  attempt  any  analysis 
of  the  reasoning  processes;  and  that  the  words  or  symbols 
proposed  by  them  do  not  stand  perfectly  generally  for  any 
classes  whatever,  like  our  x  and  y,  but  specially  for  such  and 
such  well-known  classes  as  are  already  designated  by  general 
names;  they  differ,  in  fact,  as  language  does  and  should  differ 
from  logic. 

1  I  refer  here  to  such  works  as  this  subject,  -has  discussed  many  of 

the    Ars    magna  sciendi  of   Athan.  the'  special  sets  of  symbols  appro- 

Kircher  (1631) ;  Bp.  WiMns's  often  priate  to  particular  arts  and  sciences, 

mentioned  Essay  towards  a  real  cha-  Of  course  the  growth  of  international 

racter  and  a  philosophical  language  telegraphy,   and  other  causes,  have 

(1668)  and  Dalgarno's  Ars  signorum  greatly  varied  the  relative  importance 

(1661).      A  discussion  of  Leibnitz's  of    the    schemes    known    to    him. 

speculations    and    attempts  La  this  (Neues  Organon.  Semiotik.  §  1.     Von 

direction  will  be  found  in  Trendelen-  der  symbolischen   Kenntniss  ueber- 

burg's  Historische  Beitrage,  in.  1 — 48.  haupt.) 
Lambert,  who  took  much  interest  in 


7—2 


CHAPTER  V. 

DIAGRAMMATIC  REPRESENTATION. 

THE  majority  of  modern  logical  treatises  make  at  any 
rate  occasional  appeal  to  diagrammatic  aid,  in  order  to 
give  sensible  illustration  of  the  relations  of  terms  and  pro- 
positions to  one  another.  With  one  such  scheme,  namely 
that  which  is  commonly  known  as  the  Eulerian,  every 
logical  reader  will  have  made  some  acquaintance,  since 
a  decided  majority  of  the  familiar  treatises  make  more  or 
less  frequent  use  of  it1.  Such  a  prevalent  use  as  this  clearly 
makes  it  desirable  to  understand  what  exactly  this  particular 
scheme  undertakes  to  do  and  whether  or  not  it  performs  its 
work  satisfactorily. 

As  regards  the  inapplicability  of  this  scheme  for  the 
purposes  of  a  really  general  Logic  something  was  said 
by  implication  in  the  first  chapter,  for  it  was  there  pointed 

1  Until  I  came  to  look  somewhat  suited  for  this  purpose: — somewhat 

closely  into  the  matter  I  had  no  idea  at  random,  as  they  happened  to  be 

how  prevalent  such  an  appeal  as  this  most   accessible : — it  appeared  that 

had  become.     Thus  of  the  first  sixty  thirty-four    appealed  to  the  aid  of 

logical  treatises,  published  during  the  diagrams,  nearly  all  of  these  making 

last  century  or  so,  which  were  con-  use  of  the  Eulerian  Scheme. 


CHAP,  v.]  Diagrammatic  Representation.  101 

out  how  very  special  and  remote  from  common  usage  is 
the  system  of  propositions  for  which  alone  it  is  an  adequate 
representation.  To  my  thinking  it  fits  in  but  badly  even 
with  the  four  propositions  of  the  common  Logic  to  which  it  is 
usually  applied,  but  to  see  how  very  ineffective  it  is  to  meet 
the  requirements  of  a  generalized  or  symbolic  Logic  it  will  be 
well  to  spend  a  few  minutes  in  calling  the  reader's  attention 
to  what  these  requirements  are. 

At  the  basis  of  our  Symbolic  Logic,  however  represented, 
whether  by  words  by  letters  or  by  diagrams,  we  shall  always 
find  the  same  state  of  things.  What  we  ultimately  have  to 
do  is  to  break  up  the  entire  field  into  a  definite  number  of 
classes  or  compartments  which  are  mutually  exclusive  and 
collectively  exhaustive.  The  nature  of  this  process  of  sub- 
division will  have  to  be  more  fully  explained  in  a  future 
chapter,  so  that  it  will  suffice  to  remark  here  that  nothing 
more  is  demanded  than  a  generalization  of  a  very  familiar 
logical  process,  viz.  that  of  dichotomy.  But  its  results  are 
simple  and  intelligible  enough.  With  two  classes,  X  and  F, 
we  have  four  subdivisions ;  the  X  that  is  Y,  the  X  that  is 
not  Y,  the  Y  that  is  not  X,  and  that  which  is  neither  X  nor 
Y.  And  so  with  any  larger  number  of  classes.  How  then 
are  these  ultimate  class  divisions  to  be  described  ? 

For  one  thing,  we  can  of  course  always  represent  the 
products  of  such  a  subdivision  in  the  language  of  common 
Logic,  or  even  in  that  of  common  life,  if  we  choose  to  do  so. 
They  do  not  readily  offer  themselves  for  this  purpose,  but 
when  pressed  will  consent,  though  failing  sadly  in  the  desired 
symmetry  and  compactness.  The  relative  cumbrousness  of 
such  a  mode  of  expression  is  obviously  the  real  measure  of 
our  need  for  a  reformed  or  symbolic  language.  We  must  not 
however  forget  that  we  are  not  dealing  with  mathematical 
conceptions  which  common  language  will  hardly  avail  to 


102  Diagrammatic  Representation.  [CHAP. 

describe,  but  only  with  logical  classes  -which  can  be  com- 
pletely and  unambiguously  determined  by  the  traditional 
modes  of  speech.  However  complicated  the  description  of 
any  given  class  may  be  we  could  always  build  it  up  by  means 
of  JTand  not-.X,  Y and  not-F,  and  so  forth;  whether  JTand 
F  remain  as  letters,  or  be  replaced  by  concrete  terms  such  as 
substantives  and  adjectives. 

But  it  need  not  be  insisted  on  that  we  require  something 
far  more  manageable  and  concise  than  this,  if  we  wish  to  deal 
effectively  with  really  complicated  groups  of  propositions. 
For  this  purpose  nothing  better  can  be  employed  than 
letters  such  as  we  use  in  algebra.  This  is  done  of*  course  to 
some  extent  in  ordinary  Logic,  the  only  innovation  upon 
which  we  have  to  insist  being  that  of  introducing  equally 
concise  symbols  for  negative  terms.  We  could  never  work 
with  not-#,  in  that  form,  and  must  therefore  look  about  for 
some  substitute.  The  full  significant  substitute  is,  as  already 
shown,  1  —  #,  and  this  will  often  have  to  be  employed.  But 
this  is  too  cumbrous  for  actual  calculation.  Of  the  various 
substitutes  that  have  been  proposed  for  not-#  we  shall  make 
a  practice  of  employing  x. 

The  reader  will  see  at  once  how  conveniently  and  briefly 
we  can  thus  indicate  any  desired  combination  of  class  terms, 
and,  by  consequence,  any  desired  proposition.  Thus  xyz 
represents  what  is  x,  y,  and  z\  x~yz  what  is  x,  but  neither 
y  nor  z\  xw  (yz  +  yz)  stands  for  'what  is  not  x,  but  is  w;  and 
is  also  either  y  but  not  z,  or  z  but  not  y',  and  so  forth.  The 
significance  of  such  expressions,  when  built  up  into  proposi- 
tions, will  be  fully  discussed  in  a  future  chapter. 

That  such  a  scheme  is  complete  there  can  be  no  doubt. 
But  unfortunately,  owing  to  this  very  completeness,  it  is  apt 
to  prove  terribly  lengthy.  The  powers  of  2  soon  mount  up ; 
so  that  a  pair  of  terms  will  yield  2a  combinations,  three  will 


v.]  Diagrammatic  Representation.  103 

yield  23,  or  8,  and  so  on;  the  total  number  doubling  every 
time.  Of  course  in  any  particular  proposition  or  problem  we 
shall  most  likely  not  require  to  make  appeal  to  more  than 
some  of  these  constituents,  perhaps  only  to  a  few  of  them. 
But  the  existence  of  all  has  to  be  recognized,  and  a  notation 
provided  for  every  one  of  them.  Moreover  it  is  always 
possible  that  a  problem  may  be  so  stated  as  to  demand  an 
explicit  reference  to  a  great  number,  or  even  to  all.  Suppose 
for  instance  a  proposition  were  given  involving  five  terms, 
and  we  were  told  to  enumerate  all  the  ultimate  combinations 
denied  by  it,  we  should  have  a  certain  number  of  class  terms 
on  our  hands;  and  if  to  this  were  added  the  enumeration  of 
all  the  combinations  which  were  not  denied,  we  should  have 
all  the  rest  of  the  total  of  thirty-two  before  us. 

This  then  is  the  state  of  thing  which  a  reformed  scheme 
of  diagrammatic  notation  has  to  meet.  It  must  correspond 
in  all  essential  respects  to  that  regular  system  of  class  sub- 
division which  has  just  been  referred  to  under  its  verbal  and 
its  literal  or  symbolic  aspects.  Theoretically,  as  we  shall  see, 
this  is  perfectly  attainable.  .  Indeed  up  to  four  or  five  terms 
inclusive  it  works  very  successfully  in  practice;  where  it 
begins  to  fail  is  in  the  accidental  circumstance  that  its  farther 
development  soon  becomes  intricate  and  awkward,  though 
never  ceasing  to  be  feasible. 

I.  On  the  proposed  scheme  we  have  to  make  a  broad 
distinction,  not  recognized  on  the  common  scheme,  between 
the  representation  of  terms  and  the  representation  of  proposi- 
tions. We  begin  with  the  former.  What  we  propose  to  do 
is  to  form  a  framework  of  figures  which  shall  correspond 
to  the  table  of  combinations  of  x,  y,  z,  &c.  All  that  is 
necessary  for  this  purpose  is  to  describe  a  series  of  closed 
figures,  of  any  kind,  so  that  each  successive  one  shall  in- 
tersect all  the  compartments  already  produced,  and  thus 


104  Diagrammatic  Representation.  [CHAP. 

double  their  number.  That  this  is  what  is  done  with  the 
letter  symbols  is  readily  seen.  Thus  with  two  terms,  x  and 
y,  we  have  four  combinations;  xy,  xy,  xy,  xy.  Introduce  the 
term  z,  and  we  at  once  split  up  each  of  these  four  into  its  z 
and  its  not-z  parts,  and  so  double  their  number.  Provided 
our  diagrams  are  so  contrived  as  to  indicate  this,  they  will 
precisely  correspond,  in  every  relevant  respect,  to  the  table  of 
combinations  of  letters. 

The  leading  conception  of  such  a  scheme  is  simple 
enough,  but  it  demands  some  consideration  in  order  to 
decide  upon  the  most  effective  and  symmetrical  plan  of 
carrying  it  out  in  detail1.  Up  to  three  terms  inclusive, 
indeed,  there  is  but  little  opening  for  any  variety;  but  as 
the  departure  from  the  familiar  Eulerian  conception  has  to 
be  made  from  the  very  first,  it  will  be  well  to  examine  the 
simplest  cases  with  some  care.  Our  primary  diagram  for  two 
terms  is  thus  sketched  : — 


'QD 


On  the  common  plan  this  would  represent  a  proposition, 
and  is  indeed  commonly  regarded  as  stand  ing  for  the  proposi- 
tion 'some  x  is  y';  though  (as  was  mentioned  in  the  first 
chapter)  it  equally  involves  in  addition  the  two  independent 

1  A  brief  historic  sketch  is  given  in  unsuitable  for  the  purpose.     Though 

the  concluding  chapter  of  some  pre-  the  method  here  described  may  be 

vious  attempts,  before  and  after  Euler,  said  to  be  founded  on  Boole's  system 

to  carry  out  the  geometric  notation  of  Logic  I  may  remark  that  it  is  not 

of  propositions.     I  tried  at  first,  as  in  any  way  directly  derived  from  him. 

others  have  done,  to  illustrate  the  He  does  not  make  employment  of 

generalized  processes  of  the  Symbolic  diagrams  himself,  nor  does  he  give 

Logic  by  aid  of  the  familiar  methods,  any  suggestions  for  their  introduc- 

Lut  soon  found  that  these  were  quite  tiou. 


v.]  Diagrammatic  Representation.  105 

propositions  'some  x  is  not  y\  and  'some  y  is  not  x',  if  we 
want  to  say  all  that  it  has  to  tell  us.  With  us  however  it 
does  not  as  yet  represent  a  proposition  at  all,  but  only  the 
framework  into  which  propositions  may  be  fitted;  that  is,  it 
indicates  only  the  four  combinations  represented  by  the  letter 
compounds,  xy,  xy,  xy,  xy. 

Now  suppose  that  we  have  to  reckon  with  the  presence, 
and  consequently  with  the  absence,  of  a  term  z.  We  just 
draw  a  third  circle  intersecting  the  above  two,  thus  : — 


Each  circle  is  thus  cut  up  into  four  parts,  and  each  com- 
mon part  of  two  circles  into  two  parts,  so  that,  including  what 
lies  outside  them  all  three,  there  are  eight  compartments. 
These  of  course  correspond  precisely  to  the  eight  combinations 
given  by  the  three  literal  symbols;  viz.  xyz,  xyz,  xyz,  xyz, 
xyz,  xyz,  xyz,  xyz.  Put  a  finger  upon  any  compartment,  and 
we  have  a  symbolic  name  ready  provided  for  it;  mention  the 
name,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  the  compartment 
thereby  referred  to. 

Both  schemes,  that  of  letters  and  that  of  spaces,  agree 
in  their  elements  being  mutually  exclusive  and  collectively 
exhaustive.  No  one  of  the  ultimate  elements  trespasses 
upon  the  ground  of  any  other;  and,  amongst  them,  they 
account  for  all  possibilities.  Either  therefore  might  be  taken 
as  a  fair  representative  of  the  other. 

This  process  is  capable  of  theoretic  extension  to  any 
number  of  terms.  The  only  drawback  to  its  indefinite 
extension  is  that  with  more  than  three  terms  it  is  not 


106  Diagrammatic  Representation.  [CHAP. 

possible  to  use  such  simple  figures  as  circles,  for  four  circles 
cannot  be  so  drawn  as  to  intersect  one  another  in  the  way 
required.  With  employment  of  more  intricate  figures  we 
might  go  on  for  ever.  All  that  is  requisite  is  to  draw  some 
continuous  figure  which  shall  intersect  once,  and  once  only, 
every  existing  subdivision.  The  new  outline  thus  drawn  is 
to  cut  every  one  of  the  previous  compartments  in  two,  and  so 
just  double  their  number.  There  is  clearly  no  reason  against 
continuing  this  process  indefinitely. 

With  four  terms  in  request  the  most  simple  and  symme- 
trical diagram  seems  to  me  that  produced  by  making  four 
ellipses  intersect  one  another  in  the  desired  manner; — 


It  is  obvious  that  each  component  class-figure  (say  y)  is 
thus  divided  into  eight  distinct  compartments,  producing  in 
all  1C  partitions;  that  these  partitions  are  all  different  from 
one  another  in  their  composition,  and  so  mutually  exclusive; 
and  moreover  that  they  leave  nothing  unaccounted  for,  and 
are  therefore  collectively  exhaustive.  And  this  is  all  that  is 
required  to  make  them  a  fitting  counterpart  of  the  16 
combinations  yielded  by  #,  y,  z,  w,  and  their  negations,  in 
the  ordinary  tabular  statement. 

With  five  terms  combined  together  ellipses  fail  us,  at 
least  in  the  above  simple  form.  It  would  not  be  difficult  to 
sketch  out  figures  of  a  horse-shoe  shape  which  should  answer 
the  purpose,  but  then  any  outline  which  is  not  very  simple 
and  easy  to  follow  fails  altogether  in  its  main  requirement  of 


V.]  Diagrammatic  Representation.  107 

being  an  aid  to  the  eye.  What  is  required  is  that  we  should 
be  able  to  identify  any  assigned  compartment  in  a  moment. 
Thus  it  is  instantly  seen  that  the  compartment  marked  with 
an  asterisk  above  is  that  called  xyzw.  The  simplest  diagram 
I  can  suggest  for  five  terms  is  one  like  this,  (the  small  ellipse 
in  the  centre  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  portion  of  the  outside  of 
z\  i.e.  its  four  component  portions  are  inside  ^and  w  but  are 
no  part  of  z]. 


t« 


It  nmst  be  admitted  that  such  a  diagram  is  not  quite 
so  simple  to  draw  as  one  might  wish  it  to  be;  but  then 
consider  what  the  alternative  is  if  one  undertakes  to  deal 
with  five  terms  and  all  their  combinations; — nothing  short  of 
the  disagreeable  task  of  writing  out,  or  in  some  way  putting 
before  us,  all  the  32  combinations  involved.  As  compared 
with  that  the  actual  drawing  of  such  a  figure  as  this  is  surely 
an  amusement,  besides  being  far  more  expeditious;  for  with 
a  little  practice  any  of  the  diagrams  we  have  thus  offered 
might  be  sketched  in  but  a  minute  fraction  of  the  time 
required  to  write  down  all  the  letter-compounds.  I  can  only 
say  for  myself  that  having  worked  hundreds  of  examples,  I 
generally  resort  to  diagrams  of  this  description,  in  order  to 
save  time,  to  avoid  unpleasant  drudgery,  and  to  make  sure 
against  mistake  and  oversight.  The  way  in  which  this  last 
advantage  is  secured  will  be  better  seen  presently,  when  we 


108  Diagrammatic  Representation.  [CHAP. 

see  bow  these  diagrams  are  to  be  used  in  the  representa- 
tion of  propositions  as  distinguished  from  that  of  mere 
terms  or  classes. 

Beyond  five  terms  it  hardly  seems  as  if  diagrams  offered 
much  substantial  help,  but  then  really  what  occasion  have  we 
often  to  trouble  ourselves  with  problems  which  would  intro- 
duce any  more  than  that1?  Although  however  diagrammatic 
illustration  fails  to  keep  pace  with  true  symbols,  or  letters,  in 
respect  of  symmetry  and  simplicity,  we  must  remember  that 
they  are  really  in  strict  correspondence  with  one  another. 
No  combination  of  class  terms  could  be  invented  or  expressed 
either  in  symbols,  or  in  common  language,  which  could  not 
be  made  sensible  to  the  eye  by  a  suitable  diagrammatic 
construction. 

We  have  endeavoured  above  to  employ  only  symmetrical 
figures,  such  as  Should  not  only  be  an  aid  to  reasoning, 
through  the  sense  of  sight,  but  should  also  be  to  some 
extent  elegant  in  themselves.  But  for  merely  theoretic 
purposes  the  rule  of  formation  would  be  very  simple.  We 
should  merely  have  to  begin  by  drawing  any  closed  figure, 
and  then  proceed  to  draw  others  subject  to  the  one  condition 
that  each  is  to  intersect  once,  and  once  only,  all  the  existing 
subdivisions  produced  by  those  which  had  gone  before. 
There  is  no  need  here  to  exhibit  such  figures,  as  they  would 
probably  be  distasteful  to  any  but  the  mathematician,  and  he 
would  see  his  way  to  drawing  them  readily  enough  for  him- 
self9. 

1  If  we  wanted  to  use  a  diagram  sions.      Of    course    this    loses   the 

for  fix  terms  (x,  yt  t,  w,  v,  «,)  the  advantage,  to  some  extent,  of  the 

best  plan  would  probably  be  to  take  coup    d'ceil    afforded    by   a    single 

lu-o  five-term  figures,  one  for  the  u  figure. 

part  and  the  other  for  the  not-u  part  -  It  will  be  found  that  when  we 

of  all  the  other  combinations.    Thin  adhere  to  continuous  figures,  instead 

would  give  the  desired   64  aubdivi-  of  the  discontinuous  five-term  figure 


v.]  Diagrammatic  Representation.  109 

A  number  of  deductions  will  occur  to  the  logical  reader 
which  it  may  be  left  to  him  to  work  out  in  detail.  Some  of 
them  may  be  briefly  indicated.  For  instance,  any  two 
compartments  between  which  we  can  communicate  by  cross- 
ing only  one  line,  can  differ  by  the  affirmation  and  denial  of 
one  term  only,  e.g.  xyzw  and  xyzw.  Accordingly,  when  two 
such  come  to  be  compounded,  or  as  we  may  say,  'added' 
together,  they  may  be  simplified  by  the  omission  of  such 
term;  for  the  two  together  make  up  all  xyw.  Any  compart- 
ments between  which  we  can  only  communicate  by  crossing 
two  boundaries,  e.g.  xyzw  and  xyzw,  must  differ  in  two 
respects :  it  would  need  four  such  compartments  to  admit  of 
simplification,  the  simplification  then  resulting  in  the  oppor- 
tunity of  dropping  the  reference  to  two  terms.  For  instance, 
xyzw,  xyzw,  xyzw,  xyzw,  taken  together,  amount  simply  to 
xw.  In  talking  thus  of  crossing  boundaries  it  must  be 
remembered  that  to  cross  the  same  one  twice  is  equivalent  to 
not  doing  so  at  all,  so  that  to  do  so  three  times  is  the  same 
as  doing  so  only  once;  it  merely  puts  us  outside  if  we  were 
inside  before. 

II.  So  far  then  this  diagrammatic  scheme  has  only  been 
shown  to  represent  classes  or  terms,  we  have  now  to  see  how 
it  can  be  worked  so  as  to  represent  propositions.  The  best 
way  of  introducing  this  question  will  be  to  enquire  a  little 

given  above,  there  is  a  tendency  for  ing  such  a  diagram  for  any  number 

the  resultant  outlines  thus   succes-  of  terms  which  our  paper  will  find 

sively  drawn  to  assume  a  comb-like  room  for.     But,  as  has  already  been 

shape    after  the  first  four  or  five.  repeatedly  remarked,  the  visual  aid 

If    we    begin    by    circles    or    other  for  which  mainly  such  diagrams  exist 

rounded  figures  the  teeth  are  curved,  is  soon  lost  on  su«h  a  path.     But  it 

if  by  parallelograms  then  they  are  must  be  remembered  that  their  theo- 

straight.     Thus  the  fifth-term  figure  retic  perfection,  as  regards  the  exclu- 

will  have  two  teeth,  the  sixth  four,  siveness  and  exhftustiveness  of  the 

and  so  on,  till  the  (4  +  x)lb  has  21  component  portions,  is  unaffected  by 

teeth.    There  is  no  trouble  in  draw-  their  intricacy. 


110  Diagrammatic  Representation.  [CHAP. 

more  strictly  whether  it  is  really  classes  that  we  thus  repre- 
sent, or  merely  compartments  into  which  classes  may  be  put  ? 
The  question  is  by  no  means  an  idle  one,  though  its  full  signi- 
ficance will  not  be  apparent  until  we  have  discussed  the  nature 
of  Hypothetical  and  the  import  of  propositions  generally. 

The  only  accurate  answer  is  that  our  diagrammatic  sub- 
divisions, or  for  that  matter  our  symbols  generally,  stand  for 
compartments  and  not  for  classes.  We  may  doubtless  regard 
them  as  representing  the  latter,  but  if  we  do  so  we  should 
never  fail  to  keep  in  mind  the  proviso,  "if  there  be  such 
things  in  existence."  And  when  this  condition  is  insisted 
upon,  it  seems  as  if  we  expressed  our  meaning  best  by  saying 
that  what  our  symbols  stand  for  are  compartments  which  may 
or  may  not  happen  to  be  occupied. 

The  reason  for  insisting  upon  this  distinction  is  to  be 
found  in  the  absolute  impossibility  of  ascertaining,  until  we 
have  fully  analysed  our  premises,  whether  or  not  any  particu- 
lar combination  is  possible.  We  must  be  prepared  to  make 
provision  for  any  number  of  terms,  and  it  is  impossible  to 
foresee  whether  the  existence  of  such  and  such  a  class  is 
compatible  with  the  data.  We  have  a  notation  for  each  ;  its 
place  is  ready  for  it ;  but  will  it  be  found  there  or  will  the 
place  be  empty  ?  Common  Logic,  dealing  as  it  does  with 
seldom  more  than  two  or  three  terms  at  a  time,  can  evade 
the  consequent  difficulty,  or  can  make  tacit  suppositions 
which  will  help  to  solve  it  in  most  cases.  But  with  us  the 
possible  contingencies  are  far  too  numerous  to  be  foreseen 
and  provided  against. 

Take,  for  instance,  the  following  group  of  premises,  which 
are  by  no  means  of  a  very  complicated  nature  : — 

All  x  is  either  both  y  and  z,  or  not  y, 

All  xy  that  is  z  is  also  w, 

No  wx  is  yz. 


v.]  Diagrammatic  Representation.  Ill 

It  would  not  be  easy  to  detect,  from  mere  inspection  of 
these  data,  that  though  they  admit  the  possible  existence  of 
such  classes  as  xz  and  yz,  they  deny  that  of  the  class  xy. 
But  since,  as  they  stand,  xy  is  the  subject  of  one  of  them,  we 
could  not  consistently  admit  such  a  conclusion  unless  we  re- 
strict the  force  of  that  premise  to  what  it  denies  ;  i.e.,  unless 
Ave  confine  ourselves  to  saying  that  it  just  destroys  the  class 
xyzw,  or  '  x  that  is  y  and  z  but  not  w',  and  does  nothing  else. 
We  find  in  fact  that  to  consider  ourselves  bound  to  maintain 
the  existence  of  all  the  subjects  and  predicates,  instead  of 
merely  denying  the  existence  of  the  various  combinations 
destroyed,  would  sadly  hamper  us  in  the  manipulation  of 
complicated  groups  of  propositions1. 

It  would  of  course  be  pedantically  at  variance  with 
ordinary  usage  to  insist  upon  never  speaking  of  anything 
but  compartments.  I  shall  therefore  freely  use  such  expres- 
sions as  '  the  class  xyzw',  and  so  forth.  But  when  we  thus 
speak  in  the  course  of  our  analysis  it  must  always  be  under- 
stood that  we  do  so  without  prejudice  for  or  against  the 
existence  of  such  a  class.  The  compartment  necessarily 
exists,  because  it  is  purely  formal,  but  it  must  be  left  to  the 
data  to  decide  whether  or  not  it  is  occupied.  However  we 
like  to  phrase  it,  this  distinction  between  an  ideally  perfect 
scheme  of  notation  or  classification,  which  will  meet  every 
requirement,  and  its  limitation  by  one  possible  class  after 
another  being  proved  incompatible  with  our  data,  must 
always  exist.  A  complete  enumeration  of  compartments  is 
one  thing,  but  it  is  quite  another  to  be  able  to  prove  that 
there  is  a  class  of  things  to  put  into  any  one  of  them. 

1  The    grounds    for    thu3   inter-  offered,  dependent  upon  this  analysis, 

preting  the  import  of  a  proposition  for  reading  off  any  given  proposition 

will  be  fully  discussed  in  the  course  into  its  constituent  denials. 
of  the  next  chapter,  and  rules  will  be 


112  Diagrammatic  Representation.  [CHAP. 

Our  diagrams  very  readily  lend  themselves  to  mark  this 
distinction,  and  the  plan  of  doing  so  is  nothing  but  the 
representation  of  propositions.  The  full  justification  of  the 
particular  method  here  adopted  must  be  reserved  for  the  next 
chapter,  but  the  present  will  be  the  best  connection  for  giving 
a  general  description  and  illustration  of  it.  What  we  do 
then,  is  to  ascertain  what  classes  are  negatived  by  any  given 
proposition,  and  proceed  to  put  some  kind  of  mark  against 
them  in  the  diagram.  For  this  purpose  the  most  effective 
means  is  just  to  shade  them  out.  For  instance  the  proposi- 
tion 'all  x  is  y'  is  interpreted  to  mean  that  there  is  no  such 
class  of  things  in  existence  as  '  x  that  is  not-?/',  or  xy.  All 
that  we  have  to  do  is  to  scratch  out  that  subdivision  in  the 
two-circle  figure1,  thus: — 

y 


If  we  want  to  represent  '  all  x  is  all  y',  we  take  this  as 
adding  on  another  denial,  viz.,  that  of  xyy  and  proceed  to 
scratch  out  that  division  also ;  thus 


On  the  common  plan  we  should  have  to  begin  again  with 
a  new  figure  in  each  case  respectively,  viz.,  for  'all  a;  is  y' 
and  '  all  y  is  x' ;  whereas  here  we  start  with  the  same  general 

1  Other  logicians  (e.g.  Schroder,  to  direct  attention  to  the  compart- 

ftperatiorukreit,  p.  10 ;  Macfarlane,  merits  under  consideration,  and  not, 

Algebra  of  Logic,  p.  63)  have  made  as  here,  with  the  view  of  expressing 

use  of  shaded  diagrams,  but  simply  propositions. 


v.]  Diagrammatic  Representation.  113 

outline  in  each  case,  merely  modifying  it  in  accordance  with 
the  varying  information  given  to  us. 

We  postulate  at  present  that  every  universal  proposition 
may  be  adequately  represented  by  one  or  more  denials,  and 
shall  hope  to  justify  this  view  in  its  due  place.  But  it  will 
hardly  be  disputed  that  every  such  proposition  does  in  fact 
negative  one  or  more  combinations,  and  this  affords  an  ex- 
cellent means  of  combining  two  or  more  propositions  together 
so  as  to  picture  their  collective  import.  The  first  proposition 
empties  out  a  certain  number  of  compartments.  In  so  far  as 
the  next  may  have  been  tautologous  it  finds  its  work  already 
done  for  it,  but  in  so  far  as  it  has  fresh  information  to  give 
it  succeeds  in  clearing  out  compartments  which  the  first  had 
left  untouched.  All  that  is  necessary  therefore  to  a  complete 
diagrammatic  illustration  is  to  begin  by  drawing  our  figure, 
as  already  explained,  and  then  to  shade  out,  or  in  some  way 
distinguish,  the  classes  which  have  been  successively  abolished. 
This  will  set  before  the  eye,  at  a  glance,  the  whole  import  of 
the  propositions  collectively. 

How  widely  different  this  plan  is  from  that  of  the  old- 
fashioned  Eulerian  diagrams  will  be  readily  seen.  One  great 
advantage  consists  in  the  ready  way  in  which  it  lends  itself 
to  the  representation  of  successive  increments  of  knowledge 
as  one  proposition  after  another  is  taken  into  account,  instead 
of  demanding  that  we  should  endeavour  to  represent  the  net 
result  of  them  all  at  a  stroke.  Our  first  data  abolish,  say, 
such  and  such  classes.  This  is  final,  for,  as  already  intimated, 
all  the  resultant  denials  must  be  regarded  as  absolute  and 
unconditional.  This  leaves  the  field  open  to  any  similar 
accession  of  knowledge  from  the  next  data,  and  so  more 
classes  are  swept  away.  Thus  we  go  on  till  all  the  data  have 
had  their  fire,  and  the  muster-roll  at  the  end  will  show  what 
classes  are,  or  may  be,  left  surviving.  If  therefore  we  simply 
V.L.  8 


Diagrammatic  Representation.  [CHAP. 

shade  out  the  compartments  in  our  figure  which  have  thus 
been  successively  declared  empty,  nothing  is  easier  than  to 
go  on  doing  this  till  all  the  information  furnished  by  the  data 
is  exhausted. 

As  another  very  simple  illustration  of  the  contrast  between 
the  two  methods,  consider  the  case  of  the  disjunction,  'All  x 
is  either  y  or  z '.  It  is  very  seldom  even  attempted  to  repre- 
sent such  propositions  diagrammatically,  (and  then,  so  far  as 
I  have  seen,  only  if  the  alternatives  are  mutually  exclusive), 
but  they  are  readily  enough  exhibited  when  we  regard  the 
one  in  question  as  merely  extinguishing  any  x  that  is  neither 
y  nor  z,  thus : — 


If  to  this  were  added  the  statement  that  '  none  but  the 
xs  are  either  y  or  z'  we  should  meet  the  statement  by  the 
abolition  of  xy  and  xz,  and  thus  obtain  : — 


And  if,  again,  we  erase  the  central,  or  xyz  compartment, 
wo  have  then  made  our  alternatives  exclusive ;  i.e.,  the  x,  and 
it  alone,  is  either  y  or  z  only. 

Now  if  we  tried  to  do  this  by  aid  of  Eulerian  circles  we 
nhould  find  at  once  that  we  could  not  do  it  in  the  only  way 
in  which  intricate  matters  can  generally  be  settled,  viz.,  by 


v.]  Diagrammatic  Representation.  115 

taking  them  step  by  step,  making  sure  of  each  as  we  go  on. 
These  familiar  figures  have  to  be  drawn  so  as  to  indicate  at 
once  the  final  outcome  of  the  knowledge  furnished.  This 
offers  no  difficulty  in  such  exceedingly  simple  cases  as  those 
furnished  by  the  various  moods  of  the  Syllogism,  but  it  is 
quite  a  different  matter  to  handle  the  complicated  results 
which  follow  upon  the  combination  of  four  or  five  terms. 
Those  who  have  only  looked  at  the  simple  diagrams  given  by 
Hamilton,  Thomson,  and  other  logicians,  in  illustration  of  the 
Aristotelian  Syllogism,  will  have  very  little  conception  of  the 
intricate  task  which  would  be  imposed  upon  them  if  they 
tried  thus  to  illustrate  equations  of  the  type  that  we  must  be 
prepared  to  encounter. 

As  the  syllogistic  figures  are  the  form  of  reasoning  most 
familiar  to  ordinary  readers,  I  will  begin  with  one  of  them, 
though  they  are  too  simple  to  serve  as  effective  examples. 
Take,  for  instance, 

No  Fis^, 
All  X  is  Yt 
:.  No  XisZ. 
This  would  commonly  be  exhibited  thus : 


It  is  easy  enough  to  do  this ;  for  in  drawing  our  circles  we 
have  only  to  attend  to  two  terms  at  a  time,  and  consequently 
the  relation  of  X  to  Z  is  readily  detected  ;  there  is  not  any  of 
that  troublesome  interconnexion  of  a  number  of  terms  simul- 
taneously with  one  another  which  gives  rise  to  the  main  per- 
plexity in  complicated  problems.  Accordingly  such  a  simple 
example  as  this  is  not  a  very  good  one  for  illustrating  the 

8—2 


116  Diagrammatic  Representation.  [CHAP. 

method  now  proposed ;  but,  in  order  to  mark  the  distinction, 
the  figure  to  represent  it  is  given,  thus : 


In  this  case  the  one  particular  relation  asked  for,  viz.  that 
of  .3T  to  Z,  it  must  be  admitted,  is  not  made  more  obvious  on 
our  plan  than  on  the  old  one.  The  superiority,  if  any,  in  such 
an  example  must  rather  be  sought  in  the  completeness  of  the 
pictorial  information  in  other  respects — as,  for  instance,  that, 
of  the  four  kinds  of  x  which  may  have  to  be  taken  into  con- 
sideration, one  only,  viz.  the  xyz,  or  the  lx  that  is  y  but 
is  not  z ',  is  left  surviving.  Similarly  with  the  possibilities 
of  y  and  z :  the  relative  number  of  these,  as  compared  with 
the  actualities  permitted  by  the  data,  is  detected  at  a  glance. 

As  a  more  suitable  example  consider  the  following — 

1A11  x  is  either  y  and  2,  or  not  y, 
If  any  xy  is  z,  then  it  is  w, 
No  wx  is  yz ; 

and  suppose  we  are  asked  to  exhibit  the  relation  of  x  and  y 
to  one  another  as  regards  their  inclusion  and  exclusion.  The 
problem  is  essentially  of  the  same  kind  as  the  syllogistic  one; 
but  we  certainly  could  not  draw  the  figures  in  the  same  off- 
hand way  we  did  there.  Since  there  are  four  terms,  we  sketch 
the  appropriate  4-ellipse  figure,  and  then  proceed  to  analyse 
the  premises  in  order  to  see  what  classes  are  destroyed  by 
them.  The  reader  will  readily  see  that  the  first  premise 
annihilates  all  '  xy  which  is  not  z\  or  xyz\  the  second  de- 
stroys 'xyz  which  is  not  w\  or  asyzw;  and  the  third  '  wx 


v.]  Diagrammatic  Representation.  117 

which  is  yz\  or  wxyz.     Shade  out  these  three  classes,  and 
we  see  the  resultant  figure  at  once,  viz. 

y 


It  is  then  evident  that  all  xy  has  been  thus  made  away  with ; 
that  is,  x  and  y  must  be  mutually  exclusive,  or;  as  it  would 
commonly  be  thrown  into  propositional  form,  '  No  x  is  y.' 

I  will  not  say  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  draw  Eulerian 
circles  to  represent  all  this,  just  as  we  draw  them  to  represent 
the  various  moods  of  the  syllogism ;  but  it  would  certainly  be 
an  extremely  intricate  and  perplexing  task  to  do  so.  This  ia 
mainly  owing  to  the  fact  already  alluded  to,  viz.  that  we  can- 
not break  the  process  up  conveniently  into  a  series  of  easy 
steps  each  of  which  shall  be  complete  and  accurate  as  far  as 
it  goes.  But  it  should  be  understood  that  the  failure  of  the 
older  method  is  simply  due  to  its  attempted  application  to  a 
somewhat  more  complicated  set  of  data  than  those  for  which 
it  was  designed.  But  these  data  are  really  of  the  same  kind 
as  when  we  take  the  two  propositions  'All  x  is  y\  '  All  y  is 
2',  and  draw  the  customary  figure.  When  the  problem, how- 
ever, has  been  otherwise  solved,  it  is  easy  enough  to  draw  a 
figure  of  the  old-fashioned,  or  "inclusion-and-exclusion"  kind, 
to  represent  the  result,  as  follows, 


118 


Diagrammatic  Representation. 


[CHAP. 


but  one  may  safely  assert  that  not  many  persons  would 
have  seen  their  way  to  drawing  it  at  first  hand  for 
themselves1. 

One  main  source  of  aid  which  diagrams  can  afford  is  worth 
noticing  here.  It  is  that  sort  of  visual  aid  which  is  their 
especial  function.  Take  the  following  problem  : — '  Every  x 
is  either  y  or  z ;  every  y  is  either  z  or  w ;  every  z  is  either  w 
or  x ;  and  every  w  is  either  x  or  y  :  what  further  condition, 
if  any,  is  needed  in  order  to  ensure  that  every  acy  shall  be  wT 
It  is  readily  seen  that  the  first  statement  abolishes  any  a?  that 
is  neither  y  nor  z,  and  similarly  with  the  others  ;  so  that  the 
four  abolished  classes  are  zyz,  yzw,  zwx,  and  wxy.  Shade 
them  out  in  our  diagram,  and  it  stands  thus : — 


It  is  then  obvious  that,  of  the  surviving  component  parts 
of  xy,  one  only  (viz.  xyzw]  is  not  w.    If,  then,  this  be  destroyed, 


1  Even  then  we  have  said  more  in 
this  figure  than  we  are  entitled  to 
nay.  For  instance,  we  have  implied 
that  there  it  some  x  which  is  w, 
and  BO  forth.  The  other  scheme 
does  not  thus  commit  us;  for  though 
the  extinction  of  a  class  is  final,  its 
being  let  alone  merely  spares  it  con- 
ditionally. It  holds  its  life  subject 
to  the  sentence,  it  may  be,  of  more 
premises  to  come.  This  must  be 
noticed,  as  it  is  an  important  dis- 
tinction between  the  customary  plan 
and  the  one  here  proposed.  The 


latter  makes  the  distinction  between 
rejection  and  non-rejection  —  such 
non-rejection  being  provisional,  and 
not  necessarily  indicating  ultimate 
acceptance.  The  former  has  to  make 
the  distinction  between  rejection  and 
acceptance;  for  the  circles  must 
either  intersect  or  not,  and  their 
non-intersection  indicates  the  de- 
finite abandonment  of  the  class  com- 
mon to  both.  Hence  the  practical 
impossibility  of  appealing  to  such 
diagrams  for  aid  in  representing  com- 
plicated groups  of  propositions. 


v.j  Diagrammatic  Representation.  119 

all  xy  will  be  w  ;  that  is,  the  necessary  and  sufficient  condition 
is  that '  all  xyz  is  w.' 

In  the  same  way  the  implied  total  abolition  of  any  one 
class  is  thus  made  extremely  obvious.  Take,  for  examp^, 
the  following  premises,  and  let  us  ask  quite  generally  for  any 
obvious  conclusion  which  follows  from  them  : — 

{Every  y  is  either  x  and  not  z,  or  z  and  not  x  ; 
Every  wy  is  either  both  x  and  z,  or  neither  of  the  two  ; 
All  xy  is  either  w  or  z,  and  all  yz  is  either  x  or  w. 
It  will  be  seen  on  reflection  that  these  statements  involve  re- 
spectively the  abolition  of  the  following  classes,  viz  : —  (1)  of 
yxz,  yxz ;  (2)  of  wyxz  and  wyxz ;   (3)  of  acywz  and  yzxw. 
Shade  out  the  corresponding  compartments  in  the  diagram, 
and  it  presents  the  following  appearance — 


It  is  then  clear  at  a  glance  that  the  collective  effect  of  the 
given  premises  is  just  to  deny  that  there  can  be  any  such 
class  of  things  as  y  in  existence,  though  they  leave  every  one 
of  the  remaining  eight  combinations  perfectly  admissible. 
This,  then,  is  the  diagrammatic  answer  to  the  proposed 
question. 

It  will  be  easily  seen  that  such  methods  as  those  here 
described  readily  lend  themselves  to  mechanical  performance. 
I  have  no  high  estimate  myself  of  the  interest  or  importance 
of  what  are  sometimes  called  logical  machines,  and  this  on 
two  grounds.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  very  seldom  that 
intricate  logical  calculations  are  practically  forced  upon  us ;  it 


120  Diagrammatic  Representation.  [CHAP. 

is  rather  we  who  look  about  for  complicated  examples  in. 
order  to  illustrate  our  rules  and  methods.  In  this  respect 
logical  calculations  stand  in  marked  constrast  with  those  of 
mathematics,  where  economical  devices  of  any  kind  may  sub- 
serve a  really  valuable  purpose  by  enabling  us  to  avoid  other- 
wise inevitable  labour.  Moreover,  in  the  second  place,  it  does 
not  seem  to  me  that  any  contrivances  at  present  known  or 
likely  to  be  discovered  really  deserve  the  name  of  logical 
machines.  It  is  but  a  very  small  part  of  the  entire  process, 
which  goes  to  form  a  piece  of  reasoning,  which  they  are 
capable  of  performing.  For,  if  we  begin  from  the  beginning, 
that  process  would  involve  four  tolerably  distinct  steps. 
There  is,  first,  the  statement  of  our  data  in  accurate  logical 
language.  This  step  deserves  to  be  reckoned,  since  the 
variations  of  popular  language  are  so  multitudinous,  and  often 
so  vague  and  ambiguous,  that  they  may  need  careful  con- 
sideration before  they  can  be  reduced  to  form.  Then, 
secondly,  we  have  to  throw  these  statements  into  a  form  fit 
for  the  engine  to  work  with — in  this  case  the  reduction  of 
each  proposition  to  its  elementary  denials.  It  would  task  the 
energies  of  a  machine  to  deal  at  once,  say,  with  any  of  the 
.premises  employed  even  in  the  few  examples  here  offered. 
Thirdly,  there  is  the  combination  or  further  treatment  of  our 
premises  after  such  reduction.  Finally,  the  results  have  to 
IK)  interpreted  or  read  off.  This  last  generally  gives  rise  to 
much  opening  for  skill  and  sagacity ;  for  though  in  such 
examples  as  the  last  (in  which  one  class,  y,  was  simply 
abolished)  there  is  but  one  answer  fairly  before  us,  yet  in 
most  cases  there  are  many  ways  of  reading  off  the  answer. 
It  then  becomes  a  question  of  judgment  which  of  these  is  the 
simplest  and  best.  For  instance,  in  the  last  example  but  one, 
there  are  a  quantity  of  alternative  ways  of  reading  off  our 
conclusion ;  and  until  this  is  done  the  problem  cannot  be 


v.]  Diagrammatic  Representation.  121 

said  to  be  solved.  I  cannot  see  that  any  machine  can  hope 
to  help  us  except  in  the  third  of  these  steps  ;  so  that  it  seems 
very  doubtful  whether  any  thing  of  this  sort  really  deserves 
the  name  of  a  logical  engine. 

It  may  also  be  remarked  that  when  we  make  appeal,  as 
here,  to  the  aid  of  diagrams,  the  additional  help  to  be 
obtained  by  resort  to  any  kind  of  mechanical  contrivance  is 
very  slight  indeed.  So  very  little  trouble  is  required  to 
sketch  out  a  fresh  diagram  for  ourselves  on  each  occasion, 
that  it  is  really  not  worth  while  to  get  a  machine  to  do  any 
part  of  the  work  for  us.  Still  as  some  persons  have  felt 
much  interest  in  such  attempts,  it  seemed  worth  while  seeing 
how  the  thing  could  be  effected  here.  There  is  the  more 
reason  for  this,  since  the  exact  kind  of  aid  afforded  by 
mechanical  appliances  in  reasoning,  and  the  very  limited 
range  of  such  aid,  do  not  seem  to  be  generally  appreciated. 

For  myself,  if  I  wanted  any  help  in  constructing  or 
employing  a  diagram,  I  should  just  have  one  of  the  three-, 
four-,  or  five-term  figures  made  into  a  stamp ;  this  would 
save  a  few  seconds  sometimes  in  drawing  them ;  and  we 
could  then  proceed  to  shade  out  or  otherwise  mark  the 
requisite  compartments.  More  help  than  this  would  be  of 
very  little  avail.  However,  since  this  is  not  exactly  what 
people  understand  by  a  logical  machine,  I  have  made  two 
others,  in  order  to  give  practical  proof  of  feasibility. 

For  instance,  a  plan  somewhat  analogous,  I  apprehend,  to 
Prof.  Jevons's  abacus  would  be  the  following: — Have  the 
desired  diagram  (say  the  five-term  figure  with  its  thirty-two 
compartments)  drawn  on  paper  and  then  pasted  on  to  thin 
board.  Cut  out  all  the  subdivisions  by  following  the  lines  of 
the  different  figures,  after  the  fashion  of  the  children's  maps 
which  are  put  together  in  pieces.  The  corresponding  step 
to  shading  out  any  compartment  would  then  be  the  simple 


122 


Diagrammatic  Representation. 


[CHAP. 


removal  of  the  piece  in  question.  "We  begin  with  all  the 
pieces  arranged  together,  and  then  pick  out  and  remove  those 
which  represent  the  non-existent  classes.  When  every  one 
of  the  given  premises  has  thus  had  its  turn,  the  pieces  left 
behind  will  indicate  all  the  remaining  combinations  of  terms 
which  are  consistent  with  the  data.  I  have  sometimes  found 
it  convenient,  where  the  saving  of  a  little  time  was  an  object, 
to  use  a  contrivance  of  this  kind.  There  is  no  reason  to  give 
a  drawing  of  it,  since  any  one  of  the  figures  we  have  hitherto 
employed  may  really  be  regarded  as  such  a  drawing. 

Again,  corresponding  to  Prof.  Jevons's  logical  machine, 
the  following  contrivance  may  be  described.  I  prefer  to  call 
it  merely  a  logical-diagram  machine  for  the  reasons  already 
given;  but  I  suppose  that  it  would  do  very  completely  all 
that  can  be  rationally  expected  of  any  logical  machine.  Cer- 
tainly, as  regards  portability,  nothing  has  been  proposed  to 
equal  it,  so  far  as  I  know;  for  though  needlessly  large  as 
made  by  me,  it  is  only  between  five  and  six  inches  square 
and  three  inches  deep.  It  is  intended  to  work  for  four 
terms;  and  the  following  figures  will  serve  to  show  its 
construction : — 

L  n. 


J  nnnn  L 


uu  uu 


V.]  Diagrammatic  Representation.  123 

The  first  figure  represents  the  upper  surface  of  the  instru- 
ment. It  shows  the  diagram  of  four  ellipses,  the  small 
irregular  compartment  at  the  top  of  them  being  a  re- 
presentative part  of  the  outside  of  all  the  four  class-figures ; 
that  is,  this  compartment  stands  for  what  is  neither  x,  y,  z, 
nor  w,  or  xyzw.  The  second  figure  represents  a  hori- 
zontal section  through  the  middle  of  the  instrument.  Each 
of  the  ellipses  here  is,  in  fact,  a  section  of  an  elliptical 
cylinder,  these  cylinders  intersecting  one  another  so  as  to 
yield  sixteen  compartments.  Each  compartment  has  a 
wooden  plug  half  its  height,  which  can  move  freely  up  and 
down  in  the  compartment.  When  the  machine  is  ready  for 
use  each  plug  stands  flush  with  the  surface,  being  retained 
there  by  a  pin  ;  we  therefore  have  the  appearance  presented 
in  fig.  1.  When  we  wish  to  represent  the  destruction  of  any 
class,  all  we  have  to  do  is  slightly  to  draw  out  the  appropriate 
pin  (the  pins  of  course  are  duly  labelled,  and  will  be  found 
to  be  conveniently  grouped),  on  which  the  plug  in  question 
drops  to  the  bottom.  This,  of  course,  is  equivalent  to  the 
shading  of  a  subdivision  in  the  plane  diagram.  As  the  plugs 
have  to  drop  independently  of  one  another,  a  certain  number 
of  them,  it  will  be  seen,  have  to  have  a  slot  cut  in  them,  so  as 
to  play  free  from  the  pins  belonging  to  other  plugs.  When 
the  plugs  have  to  be  returned  to  their  places  at  the  top,  all  we 
have  to  do  is  to  turn  the  instrument  upside  down,  when  they 
instantly  fall  back,  and  on  pressing  in  the  pins  again  they  are 
retained  in  their  place.  The  guards  outside  the  pins  are 
merely  to  prevent  them  from  being  drawn  entirely  out. 

The  above  seems  all  that  is  necessary  to  say  about  the 
nature  and  employment  of  logical  diagrams.  Their  use 
under  any  circumstances  has  been  objected  against  by  some 
purists,  but  not  on  grounds  with  which  readers  of  such  a 
work  as  this  are  likely  to  sympathize.  Thus  Dr  Mansel 


124  Diagrammatic  Representation.  [CHAP. 

declares  against  them  altogether  (Prolegomena,  p.  55,)  on 
the  ground  that  they  are  an  attempt  to  visualize  those 
concepts  which  while  they  remain  such  must  be  necessarily 
incognizable  by  any  faculty  of  sense,  and  solely  accessible  to 
the  understanding.  Those  who  adhere  to  the  material  view 
of  Logic  will  of  course  be  but  little  influenced  by  such  an 
objection.  What  we  are  concerned  with  is  classes  of  objects, 
actual  or  possible,  and  these  may  very  fairly  be  represented 
by  circles  or  other  closed  figures.  Such  figures  must  neces- 
sarily include  or  exclude  any  part  of  the  extension,  just  as 
the  class  must,  and  by  shading  or  otherwise  marking  the 
figure  we  can  duly  indicate  whether  or  not  such  a  class  must 
be  pronounced  actually  non-existent.  And  this  is  all  that  can 
possibly  be  expected  of  any  such  figure. 

That  letters  are  the  truly  appropriate  instruments  of 
calculation  must  of  course  be  maintained.  They  alone  can  be 
strictly  called  symbols,  and  we  must  be  capable  of  carrying 
out  every  process  by  means  of  them.  But  I  shall  make 
constant  appeal  to  diagrams  also  ;  both  for  purposes  of  mere 
illustration,  and  occasionally  because  they  will  really  afford 
much  briefer  modes  of  proof.  We  shall  use  them  in  fact 
much  in  the  same  way  as  'geometrical  proofs'  are  so 
frequently  employed  in  physical  investigations.  The  ob- 
jection to  them  is  not  that  they  are  in  any  way  inappropriate 
to  Logic,  but  that  like  other  kinds  of  pictorial  language  they 
are  too  cumbrous  for  general  purposes. 

Of  course  we  must  positively  insist  that  our  diagrammatic 
scheme  and  our  purely  symbolic  scheme  shall  be  in  complete 
correspondence  and  harmony  with  each  other.  The  main 
defect  of  the  common  or  Eulerian  diagrams  is  that  such 
correspondence  is  not  secured.  In  fact,  as  was  shown  in  the 
first  Chapter,  those  diagrams  not  only  do  not  fit  in  with 
the  ordinary  scheme  of  propositions  which  they  are  employed 


v.]  Diagrammatic  Representation.  125 

to  illustrate,  but  do  not  seem  to  have  any  recognized  scheme 
of  propositions  to  which  they  could  be  consistently  affiliated. 
The  forms  of  common  language  are  of  course  peculiar  to 
no  system  whatever,  and  therefore  can  work  in  with  any 
possible  logical  scheme,  though  they  like  some,  such  as  ours, 
less  than  others.  But  symbolic  and  diagrammatic  systeirs 
are  to  some  extent  artificial,  and  they  ought  therefore  to  be 
so  constructed  as  to  work  in  perfect  harmony  together.  This 
merit,  so  far  as  it  goes,  seems  at  any  rate  secured  on  the  plan 
above  described. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

ON  THE  IMPORT  OF  PROPOSITIONS,  AS  REGARDS  THE  ACTUAL 
EXISTENCE   OF  THEIR  SUBJECTS  AND  PREDICATES. 

A  CHAPTER  must  be  devoted  here  to  the  discussion  of  a 
connected  group  of  topics,  which,  though  assuming  decidedly 
more  prominence  in  Symbolic  Logic,  are  by  no  means 
properly  confined  to  it.  They  should,  in  fact,  have  been  so 
thoroughly  treated  elsewhere,  and  decided  one  way  or  the* 
other,  that  a  mere  reference  here  would  have  sufficed  instead 
of  a  somewhat  elaborate  explanation  and  justification  of  the 
view  to  be  adopted.  Many  logicians,  if  not  a  majority  of 
them,  have  however  passed  the  subject  by  entirely,  interesting 
and  important  as  it  is  from  any  speculative  point  of  view. 
This  is  probably  owing  to  the  prevalent  acceptance  until 
lately  of  the  Conceptualist  theory  of  Logic,  to  which,  at  least 
when  rigidly  adhered  to,  such  topics  as  we  now  propose 
to  enter  on  are  unfortunately  somewhat  alien. 

The  simplest  way  perhaps  of  introducing  the  subject  now 
to  be  discussed  is  by  raising  the  question  whether,  when  we 
utter  the  proposition  'All  X  is  y,  we  either  assert  or  imply 
that  there  are  such  things  as  X  or  Y,  that  is,  that  such 
things  exist  in  some  sense  or  other  ?  Or  again,  when  we  state 
the  proposition  'All  JCis  all  Y';  here  is  a  proposition  with 


CHAP,  vi.]  Import  of  Propositions.  127 

somewhat  more  of  predication  involved  in  it,  does  it  make 
more,  or  more  precise,  implication  as  to  this  particular 
point  of  there  being  any  X  or  Y  ? 

One  caution  at  the  outset,  in  order  to  avoid  misappre- 
hension. Any  discussion  about  the  '  existence '  of  such  and 
such  things  will  create  an  impression  in  some  minds  that  we 
propose  to  enter  on  some  kind  of  metaphysical  enquiry.  Such 
fears  are  altogether  groundless.  It  must  be  clearly  under- 
stood that  we  intend  to  discuss  the  question  entirely  on 
scientific  or  logical  ground,  without  digression  toward  con- 
siderations which  are  more  appropriate  to  metaphysics.  As 
to  the  nature  of  this  existence,  or  what  may  really  be  meant 
by  it,  we  have  hardly  any  need  to  trouble  ourselves,  for 
almost  any  possible  sense  in  which  the  logician  can  under- 
stand it  will  involve  precisely  the  same  difficulties  and  call 
for  the  same  solution  of  them.  We  may  leave  it  to  any  one 
to  define  the  existence  as  he  pleases,  but  when  he  has 
done  this  it  will  always  be  reasonable  to  enquire  whether 
there  is  anything  existing  corresponding  to  the  X  or  T  which 
constitute  our  subject  and  predicate.  There  can  in  fact  be  no 
fixed  tests  for  this  existence,  for  it  will  vary  widely  according 
to  the  nature  of  the  subject-matter  with  which  we  are 
concerned  in  our  reasonings.  For  instance,  we  may  happen 
to  be  speaking  of  ordinary  phenomenal  existence,  and  at  the 
time  present;  by  the  distinction  in  question  is  then  meant 
nothing  more  and  nothing  deeper  than  what  is  meant  by 
saying  that  there  are  such  things  as  antelopes  and  elephants 
in  existence,  but  not  such  things  as  unicorns  or  mastodons. 
If  again  we  are  referring  to  the  sum-total  of  all  that  is 
conceivable,  whether  real  or  imaginary,  then  we  should  mean 
what  is  meant  by  saying  that  everything  must  be  regarded  as 
existent  which  does  not  involve  a  contradiction  in  terms,  and 
nothing  which  does.  Or  if  we  were  concerned  with  Wonder- 


128  Import  of  Propositions.  [CHAP. 

land  and  its  occupants  we  need  not  go  deeper  down  than  they 
do  who  tell  us  that  March  hares  exist  there.  In  other  words, 
the  interpretation  of  the  distinction  will  vary  very  widely  in 
different  cases,  and  consequently  the  tests  by  which  it  would 
have  in  the  last  resort  to  be  verified ;  but  it  must  always 
exist  as  a  real  distinction,  and  there  is  a  sufficient  identity 
of  sense  and  application  pervading  its  various  significations 
to  enable  us  to  talk  of  it  in  common  terms.  No  logician  who 
utters  a  proposition  of  the  form  'All  X is  Y',  can  reasonably 
refuse  to  say  Yes  or  No  to  the  question,  Do  you  thereby 
imply  that  there  is  any  X  and  Y1 

The  clearest  way  perhaps  of  stating  the  line  of  discussion 
here  adopted  is  by  claiming  the  two  following  postulates.  I 
state  them  explicitly  and  call  attention  to  them  because  they 
are  not  familiar  to  logicians,  if  indeed  they  have  ever  been 
definitely  enunciated. 

(1)  That  we  must  be  supposed  to  know  the  nature  and 
limits  of  the  universe  of  discourse  with  which  we  are  concerned, 
whether  we  state  it  or  not.    If  we  are  talking  of  ordinary  phe- 
nomena we  must  know  whether  we  refer  to  them  without  limit 
of  time  and  space ;  and  if  not,  within  what  limits,  broadly 
speaking.     If  we  include  the  realms  of  fiction  and  imagination 
we  must  know  what  boundaries  we  mean  to  put  upon  them. 

(2)  That  we  must  come  furnished  with  some  criterion  of 
existence  and  reality  suitable  to  that  universe.     That  is,  all 
our  assertion  and  denial  must  admit,  actually  or  conceivably, 
of  verification.  Put  the  propositions  'All  X  is  Y1,  '  No  X  isF', 
into  the  forms  XY=  0,  X  Y=  0,  and  the  statements  '  There  is 
no  XY\  '  There  is  110  XY*,  must  admit  of  verification  and 
be  intelligible,  without  any  necessary  digression  into  meta- 
physics. 

Take  the  following  comparison  by  way  of  illustration. 
The  question  whether  or  not  a  certain  statement  has  been 


vi.]  Import  of  Propositions.  129 

published  clearly  requires  us  to  know  exactly  what  books  are 
to  be  appealed  to,  as  decisive  in  the  matter.  But  it  is 
equally  clear  that  the  point  can  be  settled  whatever  the 
books  thus  chosen  may  be.  The  maximum  known  stature  of 
man  could  be  decided  as  unequivocally  by  appeal  to  Swift  as 
to  Quetelet  if  we  know  what  exactly  are  the  things  we  are 
talking  of.  The  verification  of  a  statement  can  be  carried  out 
by  appeal  to  a  novel  or  a  scientific  work,  to  a  fairy  tale  or 
a  blue-book,  provided  we  know  what  our  authorities  are. 

Here,  as  on  several  other  occasions  in  this  work,  we  are  in 
face  of  three  very  distinct  questions  which  we  must  prevent 
from  getting  entangled  more  than  is  absolutely  unavoidable. 
The  first  is  one  of  popular  usage ;  the  second  is  one  of 
ordinary  logical  legislation  and  usage ;  and  the  third  is  one 
of  convenience  and  consistency  in  the  working  out  of  the 
Symbolic  or  Generalized  Logic.  The  first  two  of  these  do  not 
much  concern  us  here,  for  we  have  had  to  repudiate  once 
for  all  any  bounden  obligation  to  either  the  language  of 
common  life,  or  that  of  the  common  logic.  They  must  therefore 
be  passed  over  much  more  slightly  than  they  deserve.  It  is 
however  impossible  to  neglect  them  altogether,  since  it  is 
only  by  realizing  the  difficulties  which  meet  us  in  both 
of  those  quarters  that  we  can  appreciate  the  weight  of  argu- 
ment in  favour  of  the  conclusion  which  I  am  about  to  state. 

I.  The  first  question  then  is  merely  one  of  custom  or 
usage:  what  do  ordinary  persons  think  and  understand  on 
this  point  ?  It  is  quite  impossible  to  answer  this  question  off- 
hand; partly  owing  to  the  immense  number  and  variety 
of  the  popular  forms  of  assertion,  and  partly  to  the  mul- 
titudinous associations  contained  in  them,  these  varying  from 
the  barest  suggestion  up  to  implication  scarcely  short  of 
direct  assertion.  To  the  best  of  my  judgment  we  should 
have  to  decide  somewhat  to  this  effect 

V.  L.  9 


130  Import  of  Propositions.  [CHAP. 

The  Universal  Affirmative.  Broadly  speaking,  All  Xis  Y 
does  imply  directly  that  there  are  X's,  and  consequently  indi- 
rectly that  there  are  YV.  If  any  non-mathematician  were 
told  that  all  rectangular  hyperbolas  have  their  asymptotes  at 
right  angles  to  one  another,  he  would  assume  unhesitatingly 
that  there  are  such  things  as  rectangular  hyperbolas,  that  they 
exist  in  the  domain  of  mathematics.  And  so  with  most  other 
of  the  things  about  which  we  have  occasion  to  make  affirma- 
tive assertions.  The  main  ground  for  this  assumption  seems 
to  be  the  very  obvious  one  that  the  practical  exigencies 
of  life  confine  most  of  our  discussions  to  what  does  exist, 
rather  than  to  what  might,  or  once  did,  but  does  not  now ; 
and  that  here  as  elsewhere,  where  one  thing  is  the  rule 
and  another  the  exception  the  primd  facie  presumption  is 
in  favour  of  the  former.  People  do  not  in  general  talk 
about  what  they  believe  to  be  nonentities.  They  do  not, 
for  instance,  without  warning  describe  the  qualifications  for  an 
office  which  they  suppose  does  not  exist,  nor  do  they  state  the 
attributes  of  a  substance  which  is  nowhere,  within  the  scope 
<>f  their  enquiry,  to  be  found. 

This  seems  to  be  the  rule ;  but  there  are  some  admitted 
classes  of  exceptions.  For  instance,  assertions  about  the 
future  do  not  carry  any  such  positive  presumption  with  them, 
though  the  logician  would  commonly  throw  them  into  pre- 
cisely the  same  'All  X  is  Y'  type  of  categorical  assertion. 
'  Those  who  pass  this  examination  are  lucky  men'  would  cer- 
tainly be  tacitly  supplemented  by  the  clause '  if  any  such  there 
be.'  So  too,  in  most  circumstances  of  our  ordinary  life, 
wherever  we  are  clearly  talking  of  an  ideal.  '  Perfectly 

1  Tho  reader  must  keep  in  mind  whether  single  words,  or  groups  of 

that  we  are  not  discussing  the  ques-  words,   when  forming  subjects  and 

tion  whether  every  separate  word,  predicates  of  propositions,  are  to  be 

that  is,  substantive  or  adjective,  has  so  understood, 
things  corresponding  to  it :  but  only 


vi.]  Import  of  Propositions.  131 

conscientious  men  think  but  little  of  law  and  rule',  has 
a  sense  without  implying  that  there  are  any  such  men  to  be 
found.  Other  classes  of  cases  will  probably  occur  to  the 
reader,  but  the  broad  conclusion  remains  that  when  we  are 
speaking  of  facts  within  our  power  to  verify  we  do  not 
without  warning  predicate  of  non-existent  subjects.  And 
the  subject  of  the  proposition  being  thus  established,  it 
follows  clearly  that  that  of  the  predicate  must  be  so  too. 

The  Particular  Affirmative  and  Negative.  The  same  as- 
sumption seems  to  rule  here,  but  in  a  more  unqualified 
manner,  owing  to  the  fact  that  most  of  the  exceptions  admit- 
ted there  could  have  no  place  here.  An  assertion  confined  to 
'  some '  of  a  class  generally  rests  upon  observation  or  testi- 
mony rather  than  on  reasoning  or  imagination,  and  therefore 
almost  necessarily  postulates  existent  data,  though  the  nature 
of  this  observation  and  consequent  existence  is,  as  already 
remarked,  a  perfectly  open  question.  '  Some  twining  plants 
turn  from  left  to  right',  '  Some  griffins  have  long  claws',  both 
imply  that  we  have  looked  in  the  right  quarters  to  assure 
ourselves  of  the  fact.  In  one  case  I  may  have  observed 
in  my  own  garden,  and  in  the  other  on  crests  or  in  the  works 
of  the  poets,  but  according  to  the  appropriate  tests  of  verifi- 
cation, we  are  in  each  case  talking  of  what  is. 

The  Universal  Negative.  So  far  as  I  can  judge  it  seems 
that  we  very  commonly  make  the  same  assumption  as  before 
in  regard  to  the  subject,  but  do  not  do  so  equally  strongly  as 
regards  the  predicate.  '  No  substance  possesses  a  temperature 
below  —  280°  centigrade '  (I  must  again  remind  the  reader 
that  we  are  considering  the  subjects  and  predicates  as  wholes, 
not  the  separate  elements  of  which  they  may  be  composed). 
Since  nothing  but  substances  is  supposed  to  possess  a 
temperature  at  all,  this  negatives  the  existence  of  the  predi- 
cate altogether.  The  exceptions  here  seem  of  much  the  same 

9—2 


132  Import  of  Propositions.  [CHAP. 

kind  as  in  the  case  of  the  Affirmative,  and  perhaps  more 
frequent;  but  owing  to  the  general  reluctance  of  men  to 
quit  the  ground  of  fact  altogether,  I  presume  that  where  the 
subject  does  not  exist  we  should  generally  find  that  the 
predicate  does :  e.  g.  '  No  perfectly  wicked  character  is  to  be 
found  in  fiction.'  As  an  instance  of  a  possibly  non-existent 
subject  of  a  negative  proposition,  take  the  following: — 'No 
person  condemned  for  witchcraft  in  the  reign  of  Queen  Anne, 
was  executed.'  I  have  verified  this,  say,  by  searching  all  the 
records  of  executions  within  the  time  specified.  There  would 
surely  be  no  impropriety  in  my  publishing  the  fact  before 
ascertaining,  by  records  of  trials,  that  there  were  any  persons 
so  condemned.  The  disproval  of  this  fact,  which  would  be 
equivalent  to  showing  that  the  subject  had  no  existence, 
would  at  most  show  that  I  had  been  hasty.  It  would 
not  make  the  proposition  itself  invalid.  Where  the  sentence 
can  stand  equally  well  in  the  converted  form  it  seems  that  we 
decidedly  prefer  that  the  subject  should  be  a  reality.  Thus 
the  two  propositions  'No  unpardonable  sins  are  sins',  and  'No 
sins  are  unpardonable  sins',  are  logically  equivalent.  The 
objection  would  of  course  be  raised  in  either  case  that  what 
is  really  meant  is  that  there  are  no  such  things  as  un- 
pardonable sins,  and  that  it  would  therefore  be  best  to  say  so 
at  once;  but  whereas  the  former  proposition  strikes  every 
one  as  absurdly  stated,  the  latter  is  at  most  awkwardly 
stated.  The  ground  of  this  distinction  seems  to  me  to  lie  in 
the  natural  dislike  to  a  non-real  subject  of  such  a  proposition 
where  it  can  be  avoided. 

Any  account  of  popular  phraseology  which  is  thus 
confined  to  the  accepted  four  fundamental  forms  of  logical 
predication  is  of  course  very  imperfect,  but  we  have  no 
space  to  enquire  as  to  the  import  of  other  forms.  They 
seem  to  carry  the  most  various  degrees  of  implication  with 


Import  of  Propositions. 


133 


them.  Thus,  'None  but  X  are  Y' : — No  one  on  hearing  this 
would  be  shocked  if  the  speaker  went  on  to  say  'And  I 
do  not  believe  there  are  any  X's.'  But  the  logician  would 
commonly  phrase  this  statement  as  either  'All  Y  are  X\  with 
the  consequent  implication  that  there  are  Y*s  and  X's,  or, 
'No  not- X are  Y',  with  the  consequent  implication  that  there 
are  not -X's.  This  does  not  seem  to  be  quite  what  the 
ordinary  mind  contemplates  in  such  a  phrase. 

II.  We  must  now  see  what  the  logicians  have  to 
say  upon  the  matter.  The  most  direct  way  of  deciding 
this  point  would  be  to  listen  to  their  own  assertions,  but 
here  unfortunately  we  shall  obtain  very  little  help  indeed. 
Most  of  the  treatises  written  by  English  authors,  if  I 
am  not  mistaken,  entirely  omit  all  reference  to  the  subject; 
at  least  I  can  find  no  sort  of  critical  examination  of  it1. 


1  In  several  English  treatises  the 
question  is  raised  as  to  whether  a 
class-term  postulates  the  existence  of 
things  corresponding  to  it,  i.  e. 
whether  the  class  must  be  actual  or 
merely  potential.  But  this  question, 
though  doubtless  connected  with  the 
one  before  us,  is  quite  distinct.  All 
that  here  concerns  us  is  whether  a 
whole  sulyect  or  predicate,  as  such, 
consisting  perhaps  of  a  complex  of 
terms,  demands  such  a  postulate. 

Even  those  who  have  more  nearly 
approached  our  present  point  of 
view  have  done  so  under  two  limita- 
tions which  render  most  of  their 
discussion  irrelevant  to  our  purpose. 
For  (1)  they  have  only  (so  far  as 
I  see)  touched  upon  the  case  of 
universal  affirmative  propositions. 
And  (2)  they  have  mostly  assumed 
that  the  contrast  demanded  was 


always  the  same,  viz.  that  between 
phenomenal  or  sensible  existence  on 
the  one  hand  and  the  region  of  the 
imaginary  on  the  other  (see,  for  in- 
stance, Mill's  Logic,  i.  ch.  vm,  where 
he  discusses  the  dragon  and  its  flame- 
breathing  characteristic).  I  want  to 
make  the  question  perfectly  general. 
Take  what  test  we  please  of  existence, 
and  what  universe  of  discourse  we 
please,  and  we  ought  to  be  prepared, 
when  A  and  B  are  anyhow  connected 
in  a  proposition,  at  least  to  face  the 
question  whether  there  'is'  or  'is 
not '  an  AB.  No  one  who  considers 
such  a  question  as  beside  the  mark 
can  be  considered  to  assert  or  deny 
intelligently. 

Even  Hansel  seems  to  admit 
this  much  when  he  says  (Prolegomena, 
p.  67)  "When  I  assert  that  4 
is  B,...[l  mean]  that  the  object  in 


134  Import  of  Propositions.  [CHAP. 

There  are  indeed  two  distinct  opinions  which  have  been 
advanced  more  or  less  by  way  of  implication,  which  as 
representing  to  my  thinking  each  of  them  a  reduction 
to  absurdity,  but  in  opposite  directions,  deserve  a  short  notice. 
For  instance,  it  is  sometimes  stated  or  implied  that 
subjects  and  predicates  have  no  reference  whatever  to  the 
phenomenal  existence  or  non-existence  of  things  corresponding 
to  them.  This  is  presumably  the  view  of  the  rigid  con- 
ceptualists;  at  least  it  is  not  easy  to  put  any  other 
construction  upon  much  that  they  say.  Mansel  repeatedly 
maintains  that  we  are  concerned  with  concepts  only  and 
their  mutual  relations  to  one  another.  On  this  view  it 
might  be  urged  that  we  are  uniformly  certain  of  the 
existence  of  the  idea  or  concept  in  our  own  minds,  and 
uniformly  uncertain  (from  a  logical  point  of  view)  of 
any  phenomena  corresponding  to  it.  It  seems  impossible 
to  carry  out  this  view  consistently.  We  may,  by  a  shift, 
adhere  to  it  in  the  case  of  essential  properties ; — thus  when 
we  say  that  'all  honest  men  are  deserving  of  respect'  we 
may  maintain  that  we  are  thinking  merely  of  groups  of 
attributes  present  to  our  mind,  and  that  'deserving  of  respect ' 
is  found  amongst  those  which  compose  the  characteristics  of 
'honest  men'.  But  how  can  we  adhere  to  this  in  the  case 
of  accidental  attributes,  which  hardly  any  one  ever  thought 

which  the  one  set  of  attributes  is  (Einleitung,  §53),    in  which   he  is 

found  is  the  same  as  that  in  which  followed  by  Sigwart  (i.  p.  95),  and 

the  other  set  is  found."  Beneke    (Logik,    p.  77).     See  also 

Of   English  writers  De  Morgan  Ueberweg    (Logic,    §§  68,    69,    85) 

is  the  only  one  who  has  entered  fully  and  C.  S.  Peirce  (Journal  of  Spec. 

on  the  subject,  deciding  in  favour  of  Phil.  1868).    But  since  these  writers 

the  implication  of  existence  (Formal  have  (generally  speaking)  expressed 

Logic,  p.  111.    Syllabus,  p.  10.    Eng.  their  views  subject  to  the  limitations 

Cyclopaedia,  p.  344).    Herbart  is  the  indicated  above,  I  cannot  with  cer- 

best  known  philosopher  perhaps  who  tainty  claim  them  as  for  or  against 

has    supported    the   opposite   view  my  own  view. 


vi.]  Import  of  Propositions.  135 

of  putting  into  the  subject  till  he  heard  the  assertion  made  ? 
So  too  with  particular  propositions.  These  certainly  imply 
actual  observed  or  recorded  occurrences. 

Even  if  we  insist  upon  turning  everything  about  us 
into  a  concept  when  we  have  to  deal  with  general  propositions, 
we  shall  not  find  it  so  easy  to  carry  this  out  elsewhere, 
for  Proper  names  and  Individual  propositions  have  a  good 
deal  of  vitality  about  them  which  resents  and  resists  this 
process  of  conversion  into  the  state  of  a  concept.  And  if, 
with  Mansel,  we  are  resolutely  consistent  in  making  no 
exception  here,  what  are  we  to  say  to  Existential  propositions? 
We  are  always  liable  to  encounter  these,  and  terms  whose 
essence  (in  old  language)  is  to  exist.  They  will  still  persist, 
in  spite  of  our  efforts  to  make  away  with  them,  and  so  stalk 
about  with  the  glaring  incongruity  of  a  living  body  amongst 
the  world  of  shades  composed  of  our  concepts. 

It  may  be  remarked  that  this  question  is  intimately 
connected  with  that  of  Hypotheticals.  As  all  the  more 
consistent  logicians  who  have  adopted  this  view  have  re- 
cognized (e.g.  Herbart,  Beneke,  Sigwart)  we  thus  do  away 
with  the  distinction  between  the  hypothetical  and  the 
categorical.  That  this  must  be  so  can  be  illustrated  by 
a  very  simple  example : — '  If  there  are  any  X  which  are  Y 
then  they  are  Z',  this  is  clearly  hypothetical.  But  it  may  be 
phrased,  without  the  slightest  change  of  meaning,  'All  XY, 
if  such  there  be,  are  Z';  and  this  is  identical  in  form  with  the 
ordinary  categorical  'All  A  is  .S'when  we  accept  it  with  the 
tacit  proviso  '  All  A,  if  there  be  any.' 

This  rejection  of  the  Hypothetical,  as  a  distinct  form,  will 
not  be  any  sacrifice  to  us,  for  it  is  (as  will  be  fully  shown  in 
a  future  chapter)  a  marked  characteristic  of  this  generalized 
Logic  to  abandon  that  distinction.  But  it  is  important 
as  showing  the  really  serious  nature  of  the  difficulty  from 


136  Import  of  Propositions.  [CHAP. 

the  point  of  view  of  the  ordinary  Logic.  How  those  writers 
who  adopt  the  hypothetical  interpretation  explicitly1,  or 
those  who  adopt  it  implicitly  by  enunciating  a  theory2  which 
necessarily  implies  it,  can  still  retain  the  distinction  between 
Categorical  and  Hypothetical  as  anything  more  than  one 
of  expression,  is  to  me  unintelligible. 

Another  view,  equally  extreme  in  the  opposite  direction, 
has  been  hinted  at  by  Prof.  Jevons;  viz.  that  every  term, 
and  its  contradictory,  must  alike  be  claimed  as  represented  in 
fact,  at  least  when  they  occur  as  subject  or  predicate 
of  a  proposition.  Even  such  a  view  as  this,  if  deliberately 
maintained  and  supported  by  reasons,  would  claim  respectful 
consideration.  As  however  it  is  merely  doubtfully  advanced 
in  a  note,  with  a  very  inadequate  idea  apparently  of  its 
consequences  or  its  relation  to  ordinary  opinions  upon  the 
subject,  I  prefer  to  approach  it  by  another  path3. 

Most  logicians,  I  apprehend,  entertain  an  intermediate 
view  more  nearly  in  accordance  with  the  conclusions  of  common 
sense  and  common  language  as  indicated  above.  In  any 
complete  treatise  on  Formal  Logic  it  would  be  necessary 
to  enter  into  this  question  somewhat  fully,  so  as  to  ascertain 
in  what  direction  the  weight  of  judgment  and  reason  must  be 
considered  to  lie.  Historical  discussion  however  of  this  kind 
being  alien  to  the  object  of  this  volume  it  will  be  better  to 
approach  the  subject  in  a  somewhat  different  way ;  namely,  by 
enquiring  what  can  be  elicited  from  the  universally  accepted 
rules  of  Logic.  This  will  also  have  the  advantage  of  indi- 

1  e.g.    Spalding  (Logic,  p.    104)  the    distinction  of  hypothetical  hy 

"X  w   Y,    has   logically    no    more  maintaining  that  "  All  formal  think- 

mcaning  than  this:  if  X  is  and  if  Y  ing  is,  aa  regards  the  material  charac- 

i«,  then  X  is  Y."  ter  of  its  objects,  problematical  only  " 

*  I  refer  of  course  to  the  thorough  (Aldrich,  p.  236). 

going    Conccptualists.     Mansel,    in-  *  See  Jevons's  Pure  Logic,  p.  65. 

deed,  is  more  consistent,   rejecting 


vi.]  Import  of  Propositions.  137 

eating  those  difficulties  in  the  subject,  the  desirability  of 
avoiding  which  has  induced  me  to  accept  the  doctrine  to  be 
presently  explained. 

Perhaps  the  most  conclusive  evidence  from  this  source  is 
to  be  found  in  the  accepted  rules  of  the  syllogism.  For 
instance,  'All  Y  is  Z'  'All  Y  is  X',  would  not  enable  us 
to  conclude  as  we  do,  'Therefore  some  X  is  Z\  if  the 
propositions  had  to  be  interpreted  'All  Y,  if  there  is  any,  is  Z! 
They  must  certainly  be  interpreted '  All  Y,  and  there  is  such, 
is  Z.'  Since  however  no  special  assumption  is  announced  in 
the  case  of  Darapti  we  must  fairly  conclude  that  all  uni- 
versal affirmatives  postulate  the  presence,  so  to  say,  of 
actual  representatives  of  their  subjects,  and  consequently  of 
their  predicates. 

This  is  all  very  well  to  begin  with,  but  observe  to  Avhat 
length  it.  will  lead  us  if  we  accept  also  other  commonly 
received  rules.  For  instance,  are  we  to  be  allowed  to 
contraposit  propositions  ?  If  so  we  get  at  once  into  implications 
about  negative  terms.  From  'All  X  is  Y'  we  are  commonly 
allowed  to  derive  'All  not-F  is  not-X'  But  this  being 
a  universal  affirmative  must  indicate  that  there  are  instances 
of  not-F  and  not-X,  as  well  as  of  F  and  X.  This  is 
certainly  very  remote  from  the  popular  view,  which  never 
thinks  of  insisting  that  X  and  F  must  not  only  exist  but 
must  also  abstain  from  comprising  all  existence.  The  popular 
interpretation  of  this  form  of  proposition  is  surely  conditional 
only,  and  equivalent  to 'All  not-F,  if  there  be  any,  is  not-X.' 
Then  again  as  regards  negative  propositions.  From  'No 
X  is  F',  we  obtain  without  hesitation,  'All  X  is  not-  F.* 
Consequently  the  negative  proposition  also  must  refuse  merely 
possible  subjects  and  claim  them  as  existent1.  And  since 

1  These  remarks  apply  mostly  to      It  is  well  known  that  the  older  lo- 
the  handling  of  modern  logicians,      gicians  rather  avoided  these  negative 


138  Import  of  Propositions.  [CHAP. 

the  universal  negative  is  simply  convertible,  what  holds  of  its 
subject  must  also  hold  of  its  predicate.  Here  again  we  are  at 
variance  with  the  popular  view,  which  seems  to  recognize  a  dis- 
tinction in  this  respect  between  the  subject  and  the  predicate. 
It  really  seems  then  as  if  the  commonly  accepted  rules  of 
Logic,  when  pressed  to  their  conclusions,  would  force  us  into 
that  extreme  view  noticed  by  Prof.  Jevons.  But  none  the 
less  it  seems  to  me  a  reduction  to  absurdity.  It  involves  not 
only  a  needless  departure  from  all  popular  conviction  and 
association,  but,  if  adhered  to,  it  would  terribly  hamper  us  in 
all  our  logical  predication.  Are  we  never  to  assert  anything 
or  deny  anything  about  X  or  F  unless  we  are  certain  not 
only  that  there  are  things  which  are  Xand  Yt  but  also  things 
which  are  not  X,  and  not  Y  ?  The  former  condition  might 
not  be  any  great  hardship,  but  the  latter  would  extremely 
curtail  our  customary  right  of  denial.  Far  rather  than 
submit  to  such  restraint  we  should  abandon  the  claim 
to  contraposit  our  propositions,  or  in  any  way  to  extract 
negatives  out  of  positives.  Probably  also  we  should  think  it 
best  not  to  hold  out  for  the  right  to  simply  convert  a 
universal  negative  proposition.  Otherwise  we  should  hardly 
have  elbow-room  left  in  which  to  assert  or  deny  with  any 
sense  of  freedom. 

subjects    and   predicates,  and    that  have  given  concrete  instances  which 

the    rules  of    the    syllogism   were  may  be  expressed  by  the  letters  « No 

not   devised  for  their  employment.  A  in  B ', '  No  A  is  C ',  and  have  shown 

For  instance  several  logicians  have  that  if  we  were  allowed  to  phrase 

noticed  that  the  rules  against  draw-  them  in  the  form '  All  A  is  not-/;',  'All 

ing  a  conclusion  from  two  negative  A  is  not-C",  we  might  draw  the  con- 

premises  were  only  valid  nnder  the  elusion  'Some  not-C  is  not-J3.'     But 

supposition  that  we  might  not  thus  knowing  under  what  restrictions  the 

introduce  a  fourth  term  under  the  common  rules  were  drawn  up,  they 

guise  of  a  negative  term.     Thus  both  did  not  therefore  charge  these  rules 

IMoucqnet  (Sammluntj,    p.    78)   and  with  being  incorrect. 
DarjoB  (Weg  zur  Wahrheit,  p.  227) 


vi.]  Import  of  Propositions.  139 

Such  difficulties  as  those  just  mentioned  encounter 
us  within  the  field  of  ordinary  Logic,  aud  amongst  the 
simple  propositions  with  which  it  commonly  has  to  deal, 
but  they  would  be  but  the  beginning  of  our  troubles  in 
the  wider  field  of  Symbolic  Logic.  We  then  have  to 
deal  with  a  number  of  propositions  simultaneously,  involving 
perhaps  half  a  dozen  or  more  of  terms,  two  or  more  of  such 
terms  being  sometimes  combined  into  a  single  subject 
or  predicate1.  We  should  soon  find  that  it  was  simply 
impossible  to  tolerate  a  system  in  which  either  assertion 
or  denial  were  permitted  to  carry  along  with  it  the  implication 
of  the  existence  of  things  corresponding  to  the  subject  or 
predicate.  Any  group  of  such  propositions  would  form 
a  very  precarious  structure,  for  it  might  be  discovered  on 
careful  analysis  that  taken  together  they  demanded  the 
annihilation  of  one  or  other  of  the  subjects  or  predicates 
involved  in  them.  The  discovery  of  such  a  result  would 
instantly  involve  the  rejection  of  the  whole  group  as  involving 
mutual  inconsistencies,  the  solution  of  which  was  nowhere 
furnished  in  the  data. 

For  instance,  take  the  group, 

{All  x  is  either  y  and  z,  or  not  y, 
All  xy  is  w  or  not  z, 
No  wx  is  yz. 

There  is  certainly  nothing  intrinsically  amiss  with  any  one 
of  these  propositions,  and  on  the  rational  and  simple 

1  Professor  Bowen  (Logic,  p.  144)  compounded  he  considers  do  not  pos- 

has  seen  the  difficulty  in  the  case  of  tulate  any  existence,  but  take  their 

these  complicated  subjects  and  pre-  place    amongst    hypotheticals.      As 

dicates.     He  makes  a  special  exemp-  stated  above,  a  generalized  system  of 

tion  in  the  case  of,  say,  XY,  as  a  logic  cannot  recognize  any  distinction 

subject;  terming  the  proposition  a  between  one  and  the  other  of  these 

'  limitative '   one,    and    reading    the  forms  of  proposition, 
subject  'X  if  it  be  Y.'    Subjects  so 


140  Import  of  Propositions.  [CHAP. 

explanation  to  be  presently  offered  they  will  harmonize 
together  perfectly.  But  taken  together  they  demand,  and 
are  satisfied  by  the  condition  'No  #  is  y'}  or  'There  is- 
no  such  thing  as  xyJ  But  xy  is  the  subject  of  one  of  them, 
and  this  fact  would  therefore  (if  we  admit  the  implication 
now  under  discussion)  positively  put  a  veto  upon  such  a 
conclusion.  In  that  case  we  should  have  nothing  else  to  do 
than  to  dismiss  the  whole  group  of  propositions  together 
as  involving  an  inconsistency  somewhere,  though  we  could 
not  tell  where;  for  we  should  have  no  right  to  assign 
the  fault  of  the  inconsistency  to  one  of  the  propositions 
rather  than  to  another. 

Finally,  as  a  climax  to  all  this,  we  must  remember  that 
the  scope  of  our  propositions  has  to  be  limited  to  a  certain 
universe  of  discourse.  This  consideration  immensely  ag- 
gravates the  burden  of  all  these  restrictions;  for  it  would 
force  us  in  consistency  to  ascertain,  not  only  that  there  are 
X's  and  Y's  somewhere  or  other,  but  also  that  these  as  well 
as  their  contradictories  prevail  within  the  sphere,  perhaps 
a  very  narrow  one,  which  constitutes  the  universe  of  our 
discourse  for  the  time  being.  For  it  is  certainly  to  this 
only  that  our  premises  apply,  and  in  reference  to  which  their 
import  must  be  interpreted. 

III.  There  is  however  another  view  open  to  us  which 
will,  I  think,  avoid  all  the  difficulties  above  mentioned, 
together  with  others  which  will  present  themselves  in  the 
course  of  our  discussion.  Or  perhaps  one  ought  rather 
to  say  that  we  may  succeed  in  this  way  in  removing  all 
such  portion  of  the  attendant  difficulty  as  arises  from  real 
uncertainty  and  ambiguity  of  meaning,  for  though  this 
comprises  much  the  larger  part  of  our  trouble  it  certainly 
does  not  exhaust  it.  The  view  now  to  be  explained  is, 
1  think,  almost  necessarily  forced  upon  us  by  the  study 


VI.]  Import  of  Propositions.  141 

of  Symbolic  Logic,  though  when  it  has  been  once  realized  it 
will  be  found  to  apply  also  to  the  ordinary  interpretation 
of  the  proposition. 

Every  universal  proposition  may  of  course  be  put  into 
a  negative  form :  this  is  familiar  to  every  logician,  the  dis- 
tinction of  our  system  being  that  this  negative  side  of  a  pro- 
position is  more  consistently  and  uniformly  developed  and  pro- 
vided with  a  suitable  symbolic  notation.  Now  if  we  adopt  the 
simple  explanation  that  the  burden  of  implication  of  existence 
is  shifted  from  the  affirmative  to  the  negative  form;  that 
is,  that  it  is  not  the  existence  of  the  subject  or  the  predicate 
(in  affirmation)  which  is  implied,  but  the  non-existence  of 
any  subject  which  does  not  possess  the  predicate,  we  shall  find 
that  nearly  all  difficulty  vanishes1.  This  may  need  a  little  ex- 
planation and  justification.  Take  the  proposition  'All  x  is  y! 
There  being  two  class  terms  here,  there  are,  as  has  been 
so  abundantly  explained,  four  ultimate  classes,  viz.  xy,  x  not-y, 
y  not-#,  and  not-a;  not-?/.  Now  what  I  shall  understand  the 
proposition  'All  x  is  y'  to  do  is,  not  to  assure  us  as  to 
any  one  of  these  classes  (for  instance  xy)  being  occupied,  but 
to  assure  us  of  one  of  them  (viz.  x  not-y)  being  unoccupied. 
That  is,  instead  of  regarding  the  affirmative  form  as  being  the 
appropriate  and  unambiguous  form,  we  regard  the  cor- 
responding or  equivalent  negative  form  as  possessing  these 
attributes.  Whether  there  be  any  x's  or  y's  we  cannot  tell 
for  certain,  but  we  do  feel  quite  sure  that  there  are  no  such 
things  existing  as  '  x  which  is  not  y.' 

The  example  on  p.  139,  showed  the  necessity  of  some 

1  I   wish  to  insist  once   for  all  should  not  be  regarded  as  any  part 

that  I  am  not  proposing  to  deny  that  of    the    proposition.     Admit    them 

any  assigned  proposition  can  have  by  all  means  wherever  desired;  but 

these    implications,   but    merely   to  as    a    distinct    implication,    to    be 

maintain  that  in  the  Symbolic  Logic,  distinctly  indicated, 
as  a  means  to  generalization,  they 


Import  of  Propositions.  [CHAP. 

such  understanding  as  this.  A  solitary  proposition  may  make 
positive  implications  without  any  mischief,  but  if  it  is  to  com- 
bine harmoniously  with  other  propositions  it  must  lay  aside 
all  such  claims,  for  they  will  very  possibly  lead  to  conflict  and 
disappointment.  Whereas  if  it  confine  itself  to  its  negative 
implication,  it  will  make  a  contribution  to  the  net  knowledge 
furnished  by  the  other  propositions,  which  can  be  set  aside 
by  nothing  short  of  a  direct  contradiction  in  terms. 

It  comes  to  this  therefore,  that  in  respect  of  what  such  a 
proposition  affirms  it  can  only  be  regarded  as  conditional,  but 
that  in  respect  of  what  it  denies  it  may  be  regarded  as  abso- 
lute. The  proposition  'All  x  is  y*  may  be  written,  and  for 
the  purposes  in  hand  is  much  better  written,  '  No  x  is  not-y' 
(x  (1  —  y)  =  0,  or,  more  briefly  xy  =  0,  as  will  be  more  fully 
explained  hereafter)  that  is,  it  empties  the  compartment  xy, 
or  declares  the  non-existence  of  a  certain  combination,  viz. 
of  things  which  are  the  combination  of  x  and  not-y.  But  it 
does  not  tell  us  whether  there  is  any  y  at  all ;  or,  if  there  be, 
whether  there  is  also  any  x,  or  whether  the  two  together  make 
up  the  total  of  the  things  with  which  we  are  concerned.  All 
these  facts  it  leaves  quite  uncertain,  carefully  limiting  itself 
(so  far  of  course  as  existence  of  the  things  is  concerned) 
to  the  single  negation  of  there  being  any  xy.  Now  we  know 
that  our  symbols  are  subject  to  the  universal  condition  repre- 
sented by  1  =  xy  +  xy  +  xy  +  xy ;  or,  put  into  words,  that 
everything  must  be  either  xy,  or  x  not-y,  or  y  not-#,  or  not-a; 
not-y.  When  therefore  we  have  thus  expunged  one  of  these 
as  not  existing,  we  have  three  alternatives  left :  and  we  know 
that  some  one,  or  some  two,  or  all  three  of  these  must  be  re- 
presented amongst  existences,  but  we  do  not  know  which  of 
these  cases  may  hold  good. 

The  import  therefore,  as  regards  existence,  of  the  Universal 
Affirmative  is  very  plain.     Whatever  it  does  in  the  way  of 


vi.]  Import  of  Propositions.  143 

predication,  in  the  way  of  implication  of  existence  it  just 
denies  one  combination  and  no  more,  leaving  tha  other  com- 
binations untouched,  as  it  should  do.  Now  let  us  couple 
another  proposition  to  the  former,  by  asserting  that  '  All  y  is 
x\  as  well  as  'All  x  is  y.'  We  see  at  once  what  results.  The 
second  proposition  empties  out  the  class  xy,  as  the  former  did 
xy ;  that  is,  it  declares  the  non-existence  also  of  things  which 
are  y  and  not-#.  Before,  the  positive  possibilities  were  three 
in  number,  now  they  are  reduced  to  two ;  for  it  is  implied 
that  everything  must  be  either  both  x  and  y  or  neither  of 
the  two.  Carrying  this  process  one  step  further,  we  see  that 
three  such  propositions  would  be  requisite  to  establish  un- 
equivocally the  existence  of  any  one  of  the  four  classes.  If 
we  expunge  xy  also,  we  are  then  reduced  at  last  to  an  asser- 
tion of  existence,  for  we  have  now  declared  that  xy  is  all,  viz. 
that  within  the  sphere  of  our  discussion  everything  is  both  x 
and  y. 

The  positive  assertion  in  this  last  case  is  of  course  of  a 
peculiar  kind.  We  are  not  merely  told  that  a  certain  class 
is  represented,  but  that  it  is  represented  to  the  exclusion  of 
all  else.  It  is  the  sole  survivor  after  all  else  has  been  ex- 
punged. It  may  therefore  be  very  fairly  asked  whether  there 
is  no  simple  form  for  declaring  that  such  and  such  a  class  is 
represented,  and  for  declaring  nothing  more  ?  There  is  such 
a  form,  but  it  will  have  to  be  sought  in  the  particular  pro- 
position, and  not  in  the  universal.  I  do  not  mean  that  this 
is  naturally  understood  to  be  signified  by  such  propositions, 
but  that  they  will  readily  lend  themselves  to  such  an  inter- 
pretation with  very  little  violence,  and  are  the  only  ones  that 
will  do  so.  This  will  be  fully  explained  in  the  next  chapter, 
but  in  order  to  round  off  the  present  discussion  I  will  give  a 
few  lines  of  indication  of  what  is  meant.  The  formula  xy=  0 
expresses,  as  we  have  seen,  that  the  class  in  question,  is 


144  Import  of  Propositions.  [CHAP. 

absent ;  whilst  xy  =  1  expresses  that  it  is  not  only  present, 
but  present  to  the  exclusion  of  all  else.  Now  invent  an 
intermediate  form  acy  =  v,  where  v  is  to  stand  for  a  class  of 
which  we  merely  know  this,  that  it  is  intermediate  between 
1  and  0,  viz.  between  all  and  nothing.  The  most  natural  and 
simple  way  of  reading  off  such  a  proposition  would  be  'xy  is 
something',  corresponding  to  the  other  forms  'xy  is  all'  and 
'xy  is  nothing';  or  'there  is  xy'  This  seems  to  me  to  be  very 
nearly  the  signification  of  the  familiar  form  'Some  x  is  y'  of 
our  ordinary  Logic,  with  the  important  difference,  however> 
that  it  is  free  from  all  ambiguity  as  to  there  being  any  x  and 
y,  for  it  is  expressly  understood  to  tell  us  that  this  is  so1. 

When  therefore  we  meet  with  the  proposition  'all  x  is  y' 
I  shall  understand  it  to  be  interpreted  as  follows :  (1)  nega- 
tively and  absolutely,  'there  are  no  such  things  as  xy',  or  (2) 
positively  but  conditionally,  'If  there  are  such  things  as  x, 
then  all  the  x&  are  ?/.'  And  owing  to  the  superior  brevity 
and  absoluteness  of  the  negative  form,  we  shall  make  it  our 
ordinary  rule  to  write  down  such  a  proposition  symbolically 
in  the  form  xy=Q. 

The  foregoing  results  may  be  summed  up  by  saying  that 
whereas  it  is  quite  certain  that  common  usage  does  make 
various  assumptions  as  to  the  existence  of  the  subject  and 
the  predicate  separately,  and  quite  certain  that  the  Symbolic 
Logic  (as  here  interpreted)  does  not2,  the  state  of  the  law  on 
this  point  in  the  common  Logic  is  full  of  perplexity. 

1  This,  I  think,  partly  meets  the  *  The  symbolic  right  for  which  I 

objection  which  has  been  raised  against  contend  can  be  expressed  in  a  few 

Boole's   system  by  Mr  A.   T.  Ellis,  words.     It  is  merely  this : — that  any 

viz.  that  "an  algebra  of  0  and  1  can  logical  element  whatever  may  be  put 

correspond  only  to  a  logic  of  none  equal  to  either  1  or  0,  subject  only  to 

and    all,"    whereas   we  need  room  the  condition  that  the  sum-total  of 

for  'some'  as  well  (Proc.  R.  Soc.  all  such  elements  shall  =  1. 
voL  xxi.  497). 


vi.]  Import  of  Propositions.  145 

Much  of  the  above  discussion  will  perhaps  appear  rather 
dry  and  far-fetched,  but  we  shall  soon  find  that  it  will  lead 
to  some  interesting  and  unexpected  applications.  We  will 
begin  by  examining  the  mutual  relations  of  two  contradictory 
propositions  of  the  customary  kind.  Take  the  two  following, 
which  in  technical  language  are  termed  '  contrary'  the  one  to 
the  other :  'All  x  is  y\  and  'No  x  is  y\  It  will  sound  rather 
oddly  at  variance  with  ordinary  associations  to  ask  if  these 
two  propositions  are  compatible  with  one  another,  that  is,  if 
they  can  both  be  admitted  simultaneously  ?  It  need  not  be 
said  that  we  have  no  intention  of  trespassing  on  to  any  of  the 
ground. appropriate  to  transcendentalism,  but  are  prepared  to 
discuss  the  question  in  a  perfectly  matter  of  fact  way.  The 
reply  of  ordinary  Logic  would  doubtless  be  an  emphatic 
negative ;  and  this  reply  would  be  valid  enough  from  the 
point  of  view  of  predication,  provided  we  look  no  further  than 
that.  But  if  we  take  a  wider,  and  I  should  say  a  sounder 
view,  we  shall  readily  see  that  there  is  no  reason  whatever 
against  our  accepting  both  these  propositions.  Look  at  them 
from  the  class  or  compartment  point  of  view,  and  we  see  at 
once  that  '  All  x  is  y*  simply  empties  out  xy,  whilst  '  No  x  is 
y'  empties  out  xy.  There  is  no  harm  in  this,  no  suggestion 
whatever  of  any  conflict  or  inconsistency  here.  These  two 
negations  (for  as  such  we  regard  them  both  of  course)  when 
combined  together  are  simply  tantamount  to  denying  the  ex- 
istence of  x  at  all: — an  existence  which  no  one  had  been 
supposed  to  assert : — that  is,  the  always  implied  hypothesis 
'  x,  if  x  exist'  is  here  declared  not  to  be  admitted. 

To  the  mathematician,  or  to  any  one  trained  in  a  mathe- 
matical way  of  looking  at  things,  the  admission  of  such 
a  result  as  this  would  not  even  put  the  slightest  strain  upon 
the  language  which  he  is  in  the  habit  of  using.  Nothing  is 
more  familiar  to  him  than  the  practice  of  dealing  with  some 

V.  L.  10 


146  Import  of  Propositions.  [CHAP. 

unknown  quantity  during  a  continued  process  of  reasoning, 
and  then  finding  as  a  conclusion  that  this  unknown  quantity 
(say  a  root  of  an  equation)  is  equal  to  nothing  : — that  is,  not 
that  it  must  at  last  be  made  nothing,  but  that  we  must  now 
recognize  that  that  was  the  value  which  belonged  to  it 
all  along,  under  the  given  conditions  of  the  problem.  This 
possibility  of  complete  material  destruction  is  what  his 
symbols  must  always  be  prepared  to  face  as  something  which 
may  at  any  moment  be  declared  to  be  their  lot.  The  only 
caution  which  he  has  to  keep  in  view  is  that  of  looking  back 
to  see  that  he  has  not  unconsciously  transgressed  certain 
rules  (e.g.  division  by  the  unknown  quantity,  in  case  this 
quantity  was  equal  to  nothing).  If  therefore  we  combine 
together  two  of  these  contrary  propositions  we  must  merely 
be  prepared  to  interpret  the  combination  as  implying  that 
there  is  no  such  thing  as  the  subject  of  them  :  whether  or 
not  there  be  anything  corresponding  to  their  predicate  is  not 
thus  determined. 

In  ordinary  Logic  this  difficulty  seems  to  have  evaded 
notice1,  doubtless  owing  to  the  fact  that  ordinary  Logic 
seldom  or  never  has  to  deal  simultaneously  with  more  than 
two  propositions  and  the  conclusion  from  them  ;  these  propo- 
sitions being  moreover  very  simple  ones.  Therefore  any 
direct  and  glaring  contradiction,  such  as  that  in  question, 
could  hardly  present  itself,  for  it  would  at  once  strike  the 
attention,  and  the  premises  would  have  been  reconsidered. 
1  There  is  a  suggestion  in  this  di-  ratnmestnullangulus-quadrangulum. 
rection : — as  of  what  indeed  in  Logic  Nam  haec  propositio  vera  est  ex 
is  there  not  a  suggestion? — by  Leib-  hypothesi  impossibili"  (Specimen  de- 
nitz.  After  saying  that  from  'a  is  I'  monstrandi,  Erdmann,  p.  99).  The 
'c  is  d'  we  can  deduce  that  'tic  is  only  distinct  notice  that  I  have  met 
l"l',  ho  applies  it  to  the  case  of  of  the  subject  discussed  above  is  in 
a  and  c  being  incompatible ' '  Circulus  an  interesting  and  highly  suggestive 
eat  nullangulus.  Quadrature  est  article  by  Mr  C.  8.  Feirce  in  the 
quadrangulum.  Ergo  circulus-quad-  Journal  of  Spec.  Phil,  for  18C8. 


vi.]  Import  of  Propositions.  147 

But  any  extended  System  of  Logic,  which  ventures  to  deal 
with  combinations  of  several  complex  propositions,  must 
make  up  its  mind  how  to  deal  with  this  measure  of  contra- 
diction and  of  what  would  commonly  be  regarded  as  in- 
compatibility. Suppose,  for  instance,  that  we  have  three  or 
four  propositions,  involving  possibly  half  a  dozen  terms,  no 
untrained  acuteness  would  be  capable  of  detecting  at  a 
glance  whether  or  not  they  involved  amongst  them  this 
measure  of  contradiction.  The  example  given  on  page  139  is 
a  case  in  point.  There  are  only  three  propositions  in  it,  in- 
volving four  terms;  but  who  would  undertake  to  say  at  once, 
on  looking  at  it,  what  was  the  only  solution  of  it  ?  We  must 
always  be  thus  prepared  to  find  that  the  non-existence  of  one 
or  more  of  the  classes  involved  in  the  combination,  as  subject 
or  predicate,  is  all  that  is  required  to  harmonize  them  satis- 
factorily with  one  another.  Suppose  we  put  together  several 
Acts  of  Parliament,  Rubrics  or  Canons  Ecclesiastical,  or  rules 
of  some  club,  it  might  so  happen  that  they  turned  out,  on 
comparison,  to  be  in  this  way  irreconcilable  with  one  another. 
No  doubt  if  this  were  found  to  be  the  case  in  practice 
we  should  take  it  as  a  sign  that  the  rules  needed  remodelling. 
But  if  we  chose  to  stick  to  them  as  scientific  statements,  and 
to  treat  them  as  we  should  treat  such  statements  if  given 
us  through  a  set  of  equations,  it  might  well  be  that  the 
irreconcilability'  wrould  disappear  at  once  on  our  abandoning 
some  class  which  we  were  in  no  way  pledged  to  retain. 
The  confusion  would  have  only  arisen  from  the  fact  that  we 
were  trying  to  dispense  with  the  universal  and  necessary,  but 
tacit,  proviso  that  the  various  classes  with  which  we  deal  are 
only  referred  to  conditionally,  '  if  they  exist' ;  and  that  in  the 
case  in  question  some  of  them  did  not  exist1. 

1  Prof.  Jevons  maintains  as  already      this  extinction  either  of  any  simple 
remarked,  that  we  are  not  to  allow      class  or  of  its  contradictory.     Thus 

10—2 


148  Import  of  Propositions,  [CHAP. 

The  only  sort  of  contradiction  amongst  our  propositions 
which  we  really  have  cause  to  fear,  that  is,  the  only  one 
which  we  must  peremptorily  decline  to  admit  under  any 
interpretation,  is  one  of  a"  much  more  thorough  going  kind 
than  the  common  contradiction  of  ordinary  predication.  It 
would  be  one  which  tried  to  empty  and  to  occupy  a  com- 
partment simultaneously ;  either  directly,  as  if  we  persisted 
that  there  is  xy  and  that  there  is  not  xy,  or  indirectly,  as  if 
we  set  about  denying  the  existence  of  all  the  four  classes 
xy>  &y>  &y>  and  &y-  It  must  not  be  replied  here  that 
in  admitting  this  we  are  reintroducing  the  just  rejected  doc- 
trine that  such  propositions  as  'All  X is  Y'  and  'No  X is  Y' 
are  absolutely  incompatible.  The  two  cases  are  not  in  reality 
parallel.  In  the  latter  case  we  were  able  to  make  the 
reply: — By  all  means  let  us  admit  both  the  propositions 
simultaneously,  provided  they  are  offered  to  us  under  the 
tacit  condition  that  there  may  not  really  happen  to  be  any 
such  thing  as  an  X,  a  condition  which  in  this  case  we  should 
require  to  make  use  of.  But  when  we  are  dealing  with 
what  I  have  called  compartments  rather  than  classes,  that  is 
with  formal  instead  of  material  divisions,  no  such  reply 

of  the  example :  perfectly  admissible  conclusion.    To 

a  =  b  +  cl>  reject  such  a  conclusion  is  to  con- 

6  =  c  +  c3  found  the  formal  possibilities  of  our 

--7  _  Q  notation  with  the  material  conditions 

ad  =  bed  °^  our  ^a'a-     Such  a  principle  of 
rejection  is  difficult  enough  to  adhere 

(the    notation    is   mine)  which  de-  to  within  the  range  of  ordinary  pro- 

mandsa,  6,  c,  =  1  to  satisfy  it,  he  says  positions,   but    in  the  case  of  the 

"we  find  that  there  cannot  be  any  extended  propositions  of  the  Sym- 

S  at  all  without  contradiction,  what-  bolic  Logic  it  would  become  simply 

ever  may  bo  the  meaning  of  this  suicidal.    Who  and  what  are  a  and  b, 

result.    It  means  doubtless  that  the  I  should  like  to  know,  that  they  are 

premises    are   contradictory"  (Pure  to  be  suffered  to  refuse  treatment  to 

Logic,  p.  64).    It  means  simply  that  which  ab  submits  as  a  matter  of 

•everything  is  o'  (and  also  b  andc),  a  course? 


vi.]  Import  of  Propositions.  149 

is  available.  The  compartment  is  formal  and  necessary ;  we 
can  never  admit  the  assumption  that  it  may  possibly  not 
exist.  Things  exist  indeed  (in  the  sense  of  that  term  which 
has  been  already  fully  explained) ;  this  amount  of  assumption 
we  certainly  do  make.  And  these  things  must  either  possess 
any  assigned  attribute  or  not  possess  it ;  which  is  equivalently 
expressed  by  saying  that  they  must  certainly  fall  into  one 
or  other  of  these  compartments.  The  analogous  retort 
therefore  here,  in  order  to  be  effective,  would  have  to  be  that 
there  are  no  things  whatever,  at  least  within  the  universe  in 
question.  If  any  one  likes  to  maintain  that  this  really 
might  be  so,  on  the  psychological  theory  of  matter  and 
mind,  before  any  sentient  or  perceptive  beings  came  into 
existence  I  will  not  stop  to  dispute  it. 

We  must  now  turn  to  another  somewhat  similar  topic  in 
which  the  same  kind  of  considerations  present  themselves. 
On  the  same  grounds  on  which  we  have  to  demand  a 
discussion  and  revision  of  the  meaning  and  consequences 
of  '  contrariety '  in  propositions,  when  they  are  found  in 
combination,  we  must  also  in  consistency  demand  a  recon- 
sideration of  what  is  to  be  understood  by  the  '  dependence ' 
and  'independence '  of  propositions.  Here,  as  in  the  last  case, 
the  question  is  really  presented  to  us  in  ordinary  Logic  and 
not  in  Symbolic  only,  though  it  does  not  assume  any  serious 
aspect  within  the  range  of  the  former.  The  simple  forms  of 
dependence  indeed  with  which  the  common  system  mostly 
has  to  deal  deserve  only  a  passing  glance  by  way  of  intro- 
duction. '  A11J.  is  B,  and  '  Some  A  is  B' ;  '  No  A  is  B'  and 
'  Some  A  is  not  B'  are  obviously  dependent  in  the  sense  that 
the  second  member  in  each  pair  is  included  in,  or  inferrible 
from,  the  first.  In  the  same  way  '  X  is  neither  F  nor  Z\ 
includes  within  it  '  X  is  not  Y*,  and  so  on  with  similar  simple 
examples. 


150  Import  of  Propositions.  [CHAP. 

But  if  we  admit  that  hypothetical  interpretation  of  all 
Universal  propositions,  which  is  under  discussion  in  this 
chapter,  we  shall  readily  see  that  once  started  on  that  track 
we  cannot  stop  so  soon  as  this.  Just  as  'inconsistency'  had  to 
contract  its  boundaries  within  the  limits  of  what  was  in 
a  sense  rigidly  formal,  so  will  'dependence'  have  to  extend  its 
boundaries  up  to  the  same  limits.  Here  too  the  mathe- 
matician, and  the  mathematically  minded,  will  find  nothing 
strange  or  perplexing.  All  that  is  required  is  that  we  should 
adhere  rigidly  to  the  assigned  meaning  of  our  symbols,  and 
never  suffer  ourselves  to  give  way  to  one  of  those  pernicious 
'understandings'  or  'implications'  which  are  of  course  inevi- 
table in  ordinary  speech.  Our  x  and  y  are  undoubtedly 
symbols  standing  for  classes,  but  they  emphatically  refuse  to 
commit  themselves  to  saying  that  such  classes  are  to  be  found. 

Take  the  extremest  case  possible  of  apparent  indepen- 
dence between  negative  propositions,  for  instance,  'No  A  is  B', 
'  No  C  is  I)'  Are  even  these  really  independent  of  one  another 
in  the  sense  of  not  possessing  any  common  implications  ? 
Not  if  the  existence  of  the  subjects  and  predicates  of  the  pro- 
positions is  only  hypothetically  implied,  as  we  have  agreed  shall 
be  the  case.  For  though  neither  of  these  two  propositions  can 
be  certainly  shown  to  cover  any  part  of  the  ground  occupied 
by  the  other,  yet  they  may  prove  to  do  so  for  anything  that 
we  can  tell  to  the  contrary.  Hence  there  is  one  common 
conclusion  that  can  equally  be  deduced  from  either  of  them, 
and  accordingly,  to  that  extent,  we  must  not  speak  of  them 
as  independent.  This  common  conclusion  is  of  course, 
'  No  A  C  is  BD.'  For  if  no  A  whatever  is  B,  it  is  clear  that 
this  must  hold  of  the  A  that  is  (7,  viz.  of  AC.  Similarly, 
if  this  AC  is  no  D  whatever,  it  clearly  cannot  be  the  D  which 
is  B,  viz.  BD.  We  may  infer  therefore  (expressing  ourselves 
very  fully  and  cautiously)  'No  AC  (if  such  there  be)  is  BD 


vi.]  Import  of  Propositions.  151 

(if  such  there  be).'  But  this  interpretation  is,  as  we  have 
seen,  that  under  which  it  was  agreed  that  such  a  simple  and 
categorical  negative  as  'No  X  is  Y\  was  to  be  accepted. 

We  need  hardly  remark  that  no  logician  will  have 
any  occasion  to  feel  himself  troubled  by  material  difficulties 
in  any  of  these  cases.  If  from  'No  men  are  green',  'No  horses 
are  red',  we  should  shrink  from  drawing  the  conclusion 
'No  men-horses  are  green-red',  on  the  ground  of  its  absurdity ; 
we  must  remember  that  from  'No  Americans  are  monar- 
chists', 'No  capitalists  are  unselfish',  the  not  irrational  con- 
clusion that  'No  American  capitalists  are  unselfish  monar- 
chists', would  only  stand  upon  the  same  footing  of 
provisional  acceptance.  Both  alike  are  unassailable  in  so 
far  as  they  deny,  and  on  our  interpretation  they  are  far  too 
cautious  to  do  anything  but  deny. 

All  this  becomes  very  clear  and  straightforward  when 
regarded  in  the  light  of  our  symbols.  'No  A  is  B'  simply 
blots  out  the  occupants  of  the  compartment  AB,  as  'No 
C  is  D'  blots  out  those  of  CD.  But  AB,  as  a  compartment, 
must  contain  the  four  divisions  made  by  C  and  D,  any 
of  which  may  be  occupied ;  just  so  CD  contains  those  made 
by  A  and  B,  which  may  equally  be  occupied  and  have 
accordingly  to  be  reckoned  with.  The  subdivision  ABCD 
being  therefore  contained  within  both  AB  and  CD  it  is 
clear  that  the  original  propositions  are  to  that  extent 
not  independent  of  one  another.  If  we  were  determined 
to  make  the  second  proposition  certainly  independent  of 
the  first  we  should  have  to  limit  its  range  by  the  insertion  of 
another  clause.  We  must  phrase  it  'No  C  which  is  not  AB,  is 
D'  When  they  are  so  phrased  each  proposition  keeps  itself 
entirely  clear  of  the  ground  occupied  by  the  other,  and 
nothing  is  denied  twice  over.  Of  course  in  such  a  simple 
example  as  this  it  is  easy  to  see  by  inspection  what  is  the 


152  Import  of  Propositions.  [CHAP. 

common  part,  in  other  words,  what  is  the  amount  of 
dependence  of  the  two  propositions.  But  when  we  have 
to  deal  with  groups  of  propositions  and  considerable  numbers 
of  terms  no  acuteness  would  suffice  without  the  aid  of 
systematic  rules.  It  is  one  of  the  characteristics  of  Boole's 
system  that  it  furnishes  such  a  rule,  so  that  by  a  simple 
and  regular  procedure  every  fragment  of  surplusage  involved 
in  the  whole  group  of  propositions  is  at  once  detected 
and  brought  to  light.  It  was  the  fulfilment  of  the  require- 
ments for  avoiding  such  surplusage  of  statement  as  this 
that  Boole  contemplated  when  he  discussed  some  of  the 
conditions  of  a  perfect  language.  What  was  supposed  to 
be  demanded  was  a  system  of  statements  which  should  be 
complete  and  symmetrical;  which  should  leave  no  gaps 
between  any  of  them  unaccounted  for  (except  of  course 
where  we  are  really  in  ignorance)  and  which  should  never 
interfere  with  one  another  by  the  possibility  of  their  being 
found  to  go  twice  over  the  same  ground. 

The  reasons  for  adopting  this  interpretation  of  the 
import  of  propositions  will  only  become  appreciated  after 
the  examination  of  a  number  of  examples,  but  enough  has 
already  been  said  to  afford  a  fair  justification.  It  is  not 
for  a  moment  maintained  that  this  view  is  entirely  in  accor- 
dance with  popular  impressions  ;  though  if  the  choice  were 
between  it  and  that  which  seems  consistently  deducible  from 
the  rules  of  ordinary  Logic,  the  former  ought,  I  think,  to 
have  the  preference  on  this  ground.  For  if  the  ordinary 
person  would  be  disturbed,  after  hearing  that  'All  X  is  Y\ 
by  the  admission  that  perhaps  there  were  no  X's,  he  would 
be  still  more  disturbed  if  required  to  admit  that  there 
were  certainly  things  which  were  not  X  and  not  Y,  as 
well  as  X  and  Y.  Moreover,  as  it  happens,  we  can  readily 
rectify  even  this  divergence  from  popular  association.  I  only 


VI.]  Import  of  Propositions.  153 

say  that  'All  X  is  Y'  shall,  in  the  absence  of  express 
assurance,  be  taken  as  equivalent  to  'There  is  no  X  which  is 
not-F.'  If  such  assurance  be  given,  it  is  to  be  regarded 
as  an  independent  assertion  and  be  dealt  with  as  such. 
Of  course  this  would  complicate  matters,  and  as  it  hampers 
the  freedom  and  generality  of  our  rules  we  shall  make 
a  practice  of  avoiding  it.  But  examples  can  readily  be  given, 
and  some  will  be  given,  to  show  how  the  admission  of  any 
such  intimation  into  our  data  would  lead  to  modification 
of  our  inferences. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

SYMBOLIC  EXPRESSION  OF  ORDINARY  PROPOSITIONS. 

HAVING  thus  cleared  the  ground  in  respect  of  the  general 
existential  import  of  our  propositions,  we  are  now  in  a  posi- 
tion to  complete  the  discussion  upon  which  we  entered  in  the 
first  chapter,  viz.  as  to  the  best  mode  of  expressing  symboli- 
cally the  familiar  propositions  of  ordinary  Logic. 

I.  The  Universal  Affirmative,  'All  x  is  y.'  We  have 
seen  that  we  are  involved  in  numerous  perplexities  if  we 
permit  this  form  of  proposition  to  imply  the  existence  of 
either  as  or  y.  It  can  therefore  best  be  understood  in  the 
conditional  sense  that  if  there  be  xa  and  y's  then  all  the  #'s 
must  be  y.  How  are  we  to  put  this  meaning  into  our  symbols  ? 
Three  equivalent  forms  have  been  suggested,  one  of  them 
negative  and  the  others  positive. 

(1)  The  negative  expression  is  the  one  referred  to 
repeatedly  in  the  course  of  the  last  chapter.  We  simply 
frame  it,  xy  =  Q  ;  .viz.  'No  x  is  not-y.'  This  seems  to  cover 
unambiguously  all  the  meaning  which  we  want  it  to  cover, 
and  nothing  besides.  It  is  equally  true  whether  x  is  the 
whole  of  y  or  only  a  part  of  y.  Again  if  there  be  no  y, 


CHAP.  VIL]  Symbolic  expression  of  ordinary  propositions.  155 

then  not-y  being  'everything'  there  can  of  course  be  no  x  ; 
but  if  there  be  y  there  need  not  consequently  be  any  x. 
Also  if  y  be  'everything',  then  of  course  the  x,  if  there  be 
any  (which  is  not  necessary),  must  be  y.  This  simple  neg- 
ative form  therefore  carries  naturally  with  it  all  the  sig- 
nification which,  as  we  have  seen,  should  be  read  into  the 
Universal  Affirmative,  and  no  more  than  that. 

(2)  The  form  adopted  by  Boole  is  x  =  vy,  where  v  is  to 
be  regarded  as  an  indefinite  class  symbol.  At  least  this 
is  the  form  with  which  he  starts  in  order  to  express  such 
propositions,  the  form  which  he  deduces  as  a  conclusion  from 
his  rules  of  operation  being  the  unfamiliar  one,  x  =  $y.  The 
nature  and  justification  of  the  rules  by  which  this  latter 
mathematical  form  is  deduced  will  occupy  our  attention 
hereafter,  but  the  meaning  of  the  symbol  can  be  easily 
assigned.  In  mathematics  $  represents  the  absolutely  in- 
definite in  respect  of  numerical  magnitude,  standing  for  any- 
thing between  0  and  infinity.  We  might  propose  to  take 
it  then  in  Logic  in  exactly  the  same  sense,  with  the  one 
necessary  restriction  that  our  universe  ranging  (symbolically) 
only  from  0  to  1,  instead  of  from  0  to  co,  we  must  keep 
within  those  narrower  limits.  In  that  case  §  would  be 
absolutely  indefinite  between  0  and  1,  that  is,  it  would 
denote  a  class  which  may  be  anything  between  'nothing' 
and  'all',  inclusively.  But  although  if  we  thus  borrowed  the 
symbol  at  once  as  a  suitable  sign  of  the  indefinite,  we  might 
offer  a  fair  defence  of  our  choice,  it  must  be  insisted  on  that 
we  are  in  no  way  whatever  dependent  upon  a  second-hand 
interpretation  here.  The  symbol  has  a  rigid  logical  significa- 

oc 
tion   of  its   own.     Just   as   --   denotes  the   class  which  on 

y 

restriction  by  y  will  reduce  to  yc,  so  does  $  denote  the  class 
which  on  restriction  by  'nothing',  that  is  by  our  taking  none 


156        Symbolic  expression  of  ordinary  propositions.  [CHAP. 

of  it,  will  reduce  to  nothing.  But  clearly  any  class  whatever 
will  do  this,  so  that  §  stands  for  any  logical  class  whatever. 
That  is,  it  is  perfectly  indefinite. 

It  must  be  clearly  understood  therefore  that  if  we  put  v 
as  an  equivalent  for  § ,  this  v  is  by  no  means  a  substitute  for 
the  'some'  of  ordinary  logic,  since  it  includes  'nothing';  still 
less  for  the  'some'  of  ordinary  language,  since  it  includes 
'all.'  It  is  the  more  necessary  to  call  attention  to  this  since 
Boole  himself  has  repeatedly  treated  this  v  as  equivalent 
to  'some',  which  I  can  only  regard  as  an  oversight.  There 
is,  in  fact,  no  exact  equivalent  in  our  language  for  this  form 
{} ,  and  it  should  therefore  be  preferred  to  the  symbol  v,  for 
the  double  reason  that  this  latter  requires  a  more  special 
definition  thus  to  fix  its  meaning,  and  that  we  shall  want  it 
in  a  somewhat  more  natural  signification  when  we  come 
to  treat  of  particular  propositions.  Moreover  the  very 
unfamiliarity  of  such  a  symbol  in  Logic,  as  £,  calls  attention 
to  the  various  implications  which  we  are  to  admit  into,  or 
exclude  from,  the  meaning  of  the  proposition  x  =  %y,  or  'All 
x  is  y',  better  than  a  mere  arbitrary  letter  like  v  can  do. 
But  the  prejudices  which  it  is  likely  to  excite  are  so  violent 
that  I  must  confess  to  not  having  always  had  the  courage  to 
press  its  just  claims  to  employment. 

Before  passing  on  to  discuss  an  alternative  form  a 
difficulty  must  be  signalled  here.  We  say  that  x  =  %y  (this 
§  being  absolutely  indefinite  within  our  limits)  represents  the 
Universal  Affirmative,  and  that  only.  Now  $  includes  0. 
Hence  in  this  limiting  case  the  proposition  would  stand 
x  =  Oif.  The  inexperienced  reader  might  translate  this  into 
'  All  x  is  no  y1,  and  thence  take  it  as  the  equivalent  of  'No  x 
is  y.1  In  other  words  he  might  conclude  that  this  way  of  sym- 
bolizing the  Universal  Affirmative  had  broken  down,  since  it 
was  found  to  include  the  Universal  Negative  also.  This 


vii.]      Symbolic  expression  of  ordinary  propositions.       157 

would  be  a  mistake,  involving  the  same  play  on  the  word  'no' 
as  the  familiar  problem,  which  it  is  said  took  Whately's 
fancy,  about  'no  cat'  having  more  legs  than  'a  cat.'  The 
equation  x  =  $y  identifies  the  whole  of  x  with  an  uncertain 
portion  of  y;  when  §  =  0  it  identifies  this  whole  with  a  part  of 
y  which  is  nothing,  in  which  case  of  course  x  itself  =  0. 
'All  x  is  no  y\  if  we  are  to  use  the  phrase  in  this  case,  refers 
the  x  still  to  'a  part'  of  y,  but  declares  that  part  to  have  van- 
ished ;  it  does  not  refer  it  to  any  part  of  not-y,  and  this  last 
would  be  necessary  in  order  to  identify  it  with  the  Universal 
Negative1. 

(3)  There  is  a  third  form,  viz.  x  =  xy,  which  was 
probably  first  employed  by  Leibnitz2.  It  is  discussed  by 
Ploucquet3,  and  is  occasionally  made  use  of  by  Lambert4. 
In  no  effective  way  does  it  differ  from  the  form  last  dis- 
cussed ;  and  though  not  primarily  employed*  by  Boole  as 
representative  of  the  proposition,  is  constantly  presenting 
itself  in  the  course  of  his  analytical  processes. 

This  form  is  best  known  at  present  from  its  systematic 
employment  by  Prof.  Jevons.  In  supporting  the  use  of  it 
against  x  =  vy,  he  objects  to  this  latter  on  the  odd  ground  of 
its  indefiniteness ; — indefiniteness,  that  is,  in  respect  of  the 

1  It  was  just  at  this  point  that  an  P 

,          ,     T-f  ,,     ,  ,-r  S  =  —  or  S=OP,  he  does  not  trans- 

mgenious  scheme  by  Holland  (Lam-  oo 

bert's  correspondent:  see  on,  ch.  xx)      late  it  as  he  should,   'All  S  is  the 

„  i  S    P  same  as  no  P\  i.e.  is  nothing ;  hut 

went  wrong.    He  proposed  -  =  -  as  a 

P     if  simply  '  All  S  are  not  P\  i.e.  'No  S 

general  prepositional  form,  in  which  are  P.'     Similarly  OS= OP  is  trans- 

p  and  IT  are  to  lie  between  1  and  co  .  ]ated,  not  as  absolutely  indefinite,  but 

This  of  course  is  the  exact  equivalent  as  « All  not-S  are  all  not-P. '    This  is 

of  vS-vP  when  v  lies  between  1  to  confound  OS  =  OP  with  S= P. 

and  0,  as  on  Boole's  notation.     He  2   Difficultates    quadam    logiccc. 

then  examines  the  nine  cases  yielded  «  Omne  A  est  B  ;  i.e.  equivalent  AB 

by  putting  p  and  ir  respectively  equal  et  A. ' 

to  unity,   greater  than   unity,  and  3  Sammlung,  &c.  p.  262. 

equal  to  infinity.    But  when  he  gets  *  Sammlung,  p.212;  Log.  Ab.i.  23. 


158       Symbolic  expression  of  ordinary  propositions.  [CHAP. 

extension  of  the  predicate ;  this  characteristic  being  the  very 
thing  which  it  is  bound  to  possess  if  it  is  to  coincide  with 
the  ordinary  proposition1.  He  declares  that  he  will 
"throughout  this  system  of  Logic  dispense  with  such  in- 
definite expressions."  If  it  were  really  the  case  that  we 
thus  introduce  greater  definiteness  of  statement  it  would 
seem  to  be  a  conclusive  objection  against  the  form  in  question, 
instead  of  an  argument  in  its  favour,  for  the  proposition 
would  be  suffered  to  express  more  than  it  has  any  right  to 
express.  A  little  consideration  will  however  show  that 
the  two  forms  are  in  every  way  exactly  equivalent.  For, 
starting  with  either  x=vy  or  x  =  $  y,  multiply  each  side  by 
the  factor  y,  and  we  have  aiy  =  Q:  that  is  x  (1— y)  =  0,  or 
x  =  xy.  On  the  other  hand  if  we  start  with  x  =  xy,  and 
eliminate  y  (by  a  process  to  be  hereafter  explained)  we  are  led 
at  once  to  x  =^  y  or  x  =  vy. 

These  three  forms  then  are  exactly  equivalent  and  con- 
vertible one  with  another.  Which  therefore,  it  may  be 
asked,  is  the  best  for  our  purpose  ?  So  far  as  there  is  any 
difference,  the  distinction  lies  between  (1)  on  the  one  hand, 
and  (2)  and  (3)  on  the  other;  though  this  is  merely  the 
distinction  between  the  negative  and  its  corresponding 

1  Principles    of  Science,    p.   41.  ing  what  they  assign  to  Hamilton, 

Others  also  have  failed  to  see  the  I  quote  verbatim  :    "Hamilton  and 

substantial  identity  of  the  two  forms.  Boole  schreiben  diese  Urtheile  in  der 

Thus  A.  Riehl,  in  a  highly  laudatory  Form  X=vY,   allein  diese  Bezeich- 

review  of  the  Principles  of  Science,  nung  lasst  unbestimmt  welcher  Theil 

says,  'Boole  employed  the  indefinite  Von  Y,  -Ysei."    The  notion,  that  we 

symbol    v    for    denoting    a   partial  can  in  this  way  secure  greater  defi- 

identity;   whilst  Jevons  makes  the  nitenessof  statement,  is  really  nothing 

definite    signification    of    such    an  but  an  old  joke  expressed  in  general 

identity    visible    by    his    notation*  symbols:— 'What  functions  does  an 

(Vierteljahrtschrift  fttr   teiss.   Phil.  archdeacon   perform?   archidiaconal 

1877).    The  same  idea  is  repeated  functions.' 
further  on  in  words  which,  consider- 


vii.]      Symbolic  expression  of  ordinary  propositions.       159 

positive  form.  As  between  these  we  must  make  our  choice 
according  to  circumstances,  sometimes  one  and  sometimes  the 
other  happening  to  be  the  most  convenient  in  the  statement 
of  a  problem.  As  between  (2)  and  (3)  the  preference  should 
in  strictness  be  given  to  (2),  at  any  rate  as  the  primary  form 
of  statement.  It  is  to  be  preferred  on  the  ground  that  it 
more  prominently  calls  attention  to  the  indefiniteness  in 
respect  of  the  distribution  of  the  predicate  which,  as  we  have 
seen,  the  form  x  =  xy  somewhat  tends  to  conceal.  As  a 
primary  statement  the  form  x  =  xy,  for  'All  x  is  y\  should  be 
rejected  alike  by  the  logician  and  the  mathematician;  for  the 
former  shrinks  as  much  from  introducing  the  term  to  be  defined 
into  a  definition,  as  the  latter  does  from  offering  an  implicit 
equation  in  place  of  an  explicit  when  this  latter  is  available. 

It  should  be  observed  that,  though  these  two  latter  forms 
are  thus  exactly  equivalent,  we  shall  often  find  that  in  the 
process  of  working  there  are  reasons  for  preferring  one  or 
other  of  them.  Thus,  in  dealing  with  the  simpler  kinds  of 
statement,  we  shall  generally  find  that  x  =  xy  is  an  easier 
and  less  confusing  form  to  deal  with.  But  then  it  cannot  be 
very  readily  used  unless  the  term  on  the  left  is  single. 
Thus  xy  +  y  +  zxy  —  §  W,  if  we  wish  to  state  it  as  a  single 
proposition,  would  have  to  be  written  out  in  the  form 
xy  +  y  +  zxy  =  (xy  +  y  +  zxy)  W ;  nor  would  the  amount  of 
symbols  demanded  for  its  expression  be  economized  by 
breaking  it  up  into  three  distinct  propositions. 

II.  The  Universal  Negative :  'No  x  is  y.'  About  this 
there  is  less  difficulty.  When  I  say  that  '  No  x  is  y ',  it  will 
be  admitted,  I  apprehend,  that  it  ought  strictly  to  be  a  matter 
of  indifference  to  me  whether  x  and  y  exist  or  not.  If  either 
or  both  of  them  be  wanting  the  proposition  is  certainly 
rendered  none  the  less  significant  for  it  is  only  the  combination 
of  the  two  that  I  am  concerned  to  deny.  If  I  were  told 


160       Symbolic  expression  of  ordinary  propositions.  [CHAP. 

to  kill  a  dog  I  should  certainly  have  a  difficulty  in  executing 
the  order  in  case  no  dog  were  found  alive ;  but  if  I  were 
simply  told  to  make  certain  that  no  dog  was  in  the  garden, 
my  task  should  surely  be  rather  simplified  than  otherwise  on 
my  finding  that  there  was  neither  dog  nor  garden  in  existence. 

Accordingly  there  would  seem  to  be  little  opening  for 
difference  of  opinion  that  the  way  to  express  such  a  pro- 
position should  be  xy  =  0.  Boole  preferred  to  write  it,  at  least 
as  an  initial  step,  in  the  form  'All  x  is  not-;?/ ',  x  —  v  (1  —  y).  I 
can  see  no  advantage  in  such  a  plan ;  for,  besides  being  more 
cumbrous,  it  sets  astir  all  those  difficulties  about  the  existence 
of  the  subject  and  the  predicate,  which  it  is  our  desire  to 
avoid  and  which  the  simpler  negative  form  lets  well  alone. 
He  was  doubtless  influenced  by  feelings  of  logical  conserva- 
tism :  since  such  a  form  preserves  at  least  the  semblance  of  a 
subject  and  a  predicate,  instead  of  combining  them  into  one 
and  denying  the  existence  of  this  combination. 

III.  So  much  for  Universal  propositions,  the  treatment 
of  which  is  comparatively  easy.  We  now  come  to  particular 
propositions,  and  at  once  ground  on  serious  difficulties;  in 
fact  it  would  not  be  too  much  to  say  that  their  adequate 
representation  has  proved  a  sore  vexation  to  every  thought- 
ful symbolist.  Part  of  the  difficulty  is  one  of  mere  ambiguity 
and  affects  the  language  of  logic  and  of  common  life  alike. 
What  does  '  some '  mean  ?  what  cases  does  it  cover  ?  This 
depends  upon  whether  we  take  it  as  'some,  it  may  be  all', 
or  'some  only.'  With  the  former  explanation  'some  x  is  y' 
covers  the  four  following  cases  : — '  All  x  is  all  y ',  'All  x  is 
some  (only)  y',  '  Some  (only)  x  is  all  y\  '  Some  (only)  x  is  some 
(only)  y' :— in  fact  it  only  excludes  the  case  'No  a;  is  y'  With 
the  latter  explanation  it  would  include  only  the  last  two 
of  these  four  cases.  The  former  is  the  ordinary  logical  expla- 
nation, and  shall  be  adopted  here. 


vii.]       Symbolic  expression  of  ordinary  propositions.       161 

When  this  obstacle  is  surmounted  we  come  upon  certain 
symbolic  difficulties  of  representation  of  a  much  more  serious 
kind.  We  shall  best  see  the  nature  of  these  by  examining 
their  source.  Does  then  the  Particular  Proposition  give  us 
any  assurance  of  the  existence  of  its  subject  and  predicate  ? 
It  seems  clear  to  me  that  we  must  in  this  respect  put  it  upon 
a  different  footing  from  the  Universal  Affirmative,  and  say 
that  it  does  give  us  such  an  assurance,  on  the  ground  that 
if  it  did  not  do  so  it  would  have  absolutely  nothing  certain 
to  tell  us.  Whatever  shade  of  doubt  of  this  kind  may  hang 
over  x  and  y  in  '  All  x  is  y ',  one  thing  at  any  rate  is  certain, 
viz.  that  we  thus  extinguish  xy ;  and  from  this  we  may  deduce 
the  hypothetical  affirmative  form.  But  when  the  proposition 
'  Some  x  is  y '  comes  to  be  affected  in  the  same  way,  it  is 
paralyzed  at  once.  It  can  extinguish  no  class  and  establish 
no  class7%nd  has  therefore  no  categorical  information  to  give 
the  world.  But  that  this  characteristic  of  really  establishing 
something  must  be  admitted,  and  indeed  made  prominent  in 
such  propositions,  was,  I  hope,  fully  made  out  in  the  last 
chapter.  And  this  is  borne  out  by  popular  usage,  for  such 
propositions  have,  so  to  say,  a  tone  of  reality  and  of  sober 
fact  about  them  which  cannot  always  be  claimed  for  universals. 

Boole's  formula  is  vx  =  vy,  where  v  is  to  be  regarded  as  an 
indeterminate  class-term.  This  is  seen  at  once  to  be  obnoxious 
to  various  objections.  For  one  thing  it  is  cumbrous  and 
awkward  compared  with  the  form  to  be  presently  advocated, 
viz.  xy  =  v.  But  the  main  difficulty,  to  my  thinking,  is  in 
the  interpretation  to  be  assigned  to  this  term  v.  We  may 
call  it  an  '  indeterminate '  symbol,  as  Boole  repeatedly  does, 
but  we  cannot  afford  to  let  it  really  be  so,  or  the  proposition, 
as  we  have  just  seen,  will  break  down  and  have  no  message 
to  give  us.  We  must  expressly  stipulate  therefore  that  v 
shall  not  equal  nothing.  But  thus  to  introduce  a  symbol  v, 
V.  L.  11 


162       Symbolic  expression  of  ordinary  propositions.  [CHAP. 

to  speak  of  it  as  if  it  was  like  any  other  class  terra,  to  com- 
pound it  with  other  such  terms  and  commute  it  at  will, 
and  yet  to  subject  it  to  special  and  peculiar  restrictions  of 
value  unknown  to  any  other  of  our  class  symbols,  is  to  say 
the  least  very  awkward  and  questionable.  If  indeed  we  really 
wanted  to  represent  entire  indefiniteness  it  would  be  better 
not  to  use  the  letter  v  for  the  purpose.  We  have  already 
made  acquaintance  with  a  symbol  which  aptly  signifies  such 
indefiniteness.  So  if  we  wish  to  see  how  vx  =  vy  would  look, 
when  v  was  unrestricted,  we  had  best  write  it  at  once  §x  =  $  y, 
and  make  what  we  can  of  it  \ 

My  own  conviction  is  that  we  shall  not,  in  this  way,  make 
much  of  the  symbolic  treatment  of  particular  propositions; 
the  fact  being  that  they  are,  in  their  common  acceptation, 
too  quantitative  for  us.  What  Symbolic  Logic  works  upon 
by  preference  is  a  system  of  dichotomy,  of  x  and  not-#,  y  and 

1  In  his  Pr.  of  Science  (p.  41)  AB  =AC,  for  'some  E  is  C",  is  merely 
Prof.  Jevons  declares,  as  already  re-  Boole's  vx  —  vy  over  again  ;  or  rather 
marked,  that  he  shall  dispense  with  it  is  that  form  with  one  exception 
such  indefinite  expressions  as  'some'.  which  here  assumes  a  certain  import - 
("  This  can  readily  be  done  by  substi-  ance.  It  was  shown  hi  the  last  chapter 
tuting  one  of  the  other  terms.  To  that  Prof.  Jevons  had  adopted  a  sadly 
express  the  proposition  'Ally's  are  hampering  restriction  by  declaring 
some  Z?V  I  shall  not  use  the  form  that  no  simple  class-term  was  to  be 
A  —  VB,  but  A  =  A B  ". )  Unfortunate-  equated  to  either  0  or  1.  As  a  gene- 
ly  this  is  not  what  can  be  done  in  the  ral  restriction  on  our  symbolic  pro- 
case  of  a  really  particular  proposi-  cedure  this  would  be  suicidal, — in 
tion,  as  is  exemplified  by  Jevons  fact  it  cannot  be  adhered  to, — but 
himself  a  few  pages  on,  in  treating  in  this  special  case  it  comes  in  ser- 
the  proposition  '  some  nebula)  do  not  viceably,  or  rather  half  of  it  does, 
give  continuous  spectra'.  He  says  By  forbidding  the  value  A=0,  in 
at  once,  "treating  the  little  wordsomc  AB  =  AC,  we  save  'some'  from  being 
as  an  indeterminate  adjective  of  se-  'none';  and  this  is  well.  But  by 
lection,  to  which  wo  assign  a  symbol  forbidding  A  =  1,  we  prevent '  some' 
like  any  other  adjective,  let  A  =  some,  from  being  '  all ',  both  in  subject  and 
71  =  nebulae,  &c."  (p.  85).  predicate,  and  this  is  by  no  means 
This,  since  it  gives  the  form  what  we  intend  to  imply. 


vii.]      Symbolic  expression  of  ordinary  propositions.       163 

not-y,  and  so  forth.  The  sort  of  propositions  therefore  that 
suit  us  best  are  those  which  yield  two  alternatives  only, 
such  as  individual  propositions : — A  is  B,  A  is  not-B,  and  so 
on.  But  the  particular  proposition,  in  its  common  acceptation, 
slips  in  between  these  two  and  says  'Some  of  the  A's  are, 
or  are  not,  B  '.  And  this  we  cannot  conveniently  represent 
symbolically.  Of  course  if  these  '  some '  were  indicated  by 
a  genuine  class-term  we  could  express  them  at  once ;  they 
would  then  be  marked  off  by  C  or  D,  and  would  become  the 
GA,  or  the  DA,  or  whatever  it  might  be.  But  it  hardly  needs 
pointing  out  that  we  have  then  quitted  the  particular  and 
taken  to  the  universal  again,  for  the  CA  is  by  no  means  the 
vague  'Some  A  '.  If  by  'some  men  have  curly  hair'  I  mean 
that  black  men  have,  I  had  better  substitute  'black'  for 
'  some ',  and  so  make  a  universal  of  it.  But  this  completely 
alters  the  kind  of  proposition.  'Black  men'  are  the  objects 
common  to  the  classes  '  black '  and  '  man  ' : — in  contrast  with 
this  let  us  try  to  put  ourselves  in  the  position  of  taking  the 
common  part  of  the  class  '  man  '  and  the  class  '  some '.  The 
word  '  some '  marks,  and  most  appropriately  marks,  those 
cases  in  which  we  are  wholly  without  any  other  selective 
class-term  which  we  could  substitute,  for  it:  e.g.  'some  throws 
of  a  penny  will  give  heads ',  where  it  is  impossible  to  sub- 
stitute any  more  definite  term  for  '  some  '.  The  device  by 
which  we  evaded,  or  thought  we  evaded,  the  indefiniteness 
of  the  predicate  in  '  All  A  is  some  B ',  by  saying  that  the 
A  is  AB,  fails  us  entirely  in  the  case  of  true  particulars.  We 
cannot  conceal  our  ignorance  in  the  case  of  '  Some  A  is  B ', 
where  both  subject  and  predicate  being  in  the  same  predica- 
ment of  uncertainty  neither  can  aid  or  prompt  the  other1. 

1  There  is  another  form  which  Mr  J.  J.  Murphy.  Thus  the  latter 
has  been  adopted  for  particular  pro-  writes  '  some  x  is  y '  in  the  form 
positions  by  Professor  Delbo?uf  and  x-q  —  y-p  (Eelation  of  Logic  to 

11—2 


16-4       Symbolic  expression  of  ordinary  propositions.   [CHAP. 

Another  illustration  may  be  offered  to  show  how  alien 
is  the  ordinary  sense  of  '  some  '  from  the  customary  symbolic 
treatment.  We  know  that  not-A  always  means  the  rest, 
after  A  has  been  excepted  ;  so  that  A  and  not--4  together 
make  up  '  all'.  Accordingly,  if '  some '  be  marked  by  a  class- 
term  like  any  other  substantive  or  adjective,  '  not-some ' 
ought  to  mean  '  all  except  that  some '.  We  shall  have 
instances  hereafter  of  this  treatment  of  a  really  indeterminate 
class-term,  when  it  will  appear  that  $  and  1  —  $  are  pre- 
cisely equivalent  in  their  signification.  But  it  would  surely 
be  doing  unnecessary  violence  to  common  usage  to  insist 
upon  using  the  word  '  some '  here,  and  so  to  maintain  that 
'  not-some '  also  meant  '  some '  instead  of,  as  by  invariable 
usage,  meaning  '  none '.  Turn  it  how  we  will,  language  and 
common  sense  rebel  against  the  attempt  to  put  '  some '  on 
the  same  symbolic  footing  as  any  other  substantive  or 
adjective,  by  assigning  it  an  exactly  analogous  class  symbol. 

My  own  view  is  that  we  shall  best  succeed  with  these 
troublesome  propositions  by  taking  account  of  quite  another 
side  of  their  character.  To  secure  as  much  as  possible  of  the 
current  signification  of  the  particular  affirmative,  and  to 
express  this  clearly  in  symbols,  we  shall  do  best  to  write 

Language.  See  also  Mind,  no.  v).  When  these  conditions  are  secured, 
The  meaning  of  this  is,  that,  since  this  exception  by  'subtraction'  be- 
ar and  //  must  have  some  part  in  comes  identical  with  exception  by 
common,  if  we  deduct  the  '  .r  that  is  '  multiplication ' ;  that  is,  the  formula 
not-y'  (call  it  q)  from  z,  and  the  'y  may  be  written  x  (l-?)=y  (\-p) 
that  is  not-x'  (call  it  p)  from  y,  the  which  is  formally  identical  with 
remainders  will  coincide.  The  ob-  Boole's  vx=vy.  And  then  finally 
jection  to  this  form  seems  to  me  to  we  encounter  here,  as  there,  the 
lie  mainly  in  the  conditions  by  which  question  as  to  what  are  the  limiting 
it  must  l^y  propped  up,  for  we  must  values  to  be  admitted  for  the  term 
insist  that  q  shall  be  contained  in  employed  in  subtraction  or  multipli- 
x,  and  p  in  y :  facts  which  the  cation, 
symbols  themselves  do  not  indicate. 


VIL]      Symbolic  expression  of  ordinary  propositions.       165 

it  in  the  form1  xy  =  v.  In  so  writing  it  we  must  observe 
that  v  is  not  a  strictly  indeterminate  class  symbol,  but  is 
taken  as  excluding  the  value  0,  or  none : — whether  it  is  also 
to  be  taken  as  excluding  the  value  1,  or  all,  is  not  of  so 
much  importance,  and  will  be  briefly  noticed  presently. 

What  we  thus  lay  the  stress  on  is  the  existential  character 
of  such  propositions.  The  expression  xy  =  v  may  be  read  off 
in  words  as  '  xy  is  something',  i.e.  is  not  nothing;  or,  more 
colloquially,  'There  is  xy\  or  ' x  and  y  are  sometimes  found 
together'.  The  last  two  of  these  forms  are  of  quite  familiar 
occurrence  in  the  language  of  common  life,  and  would,  I 
think,  be  naturally  accepted  as  equivalents  of  the  logical 
particular  affirmative.  Similarly,  when  we  want  to  express 
the  particular  negative  we  adopt  the  form  ocy  =  v.  This 


1  It  deserves  notice  that  Boole 
did  adopt  this  form  in  his  earlier 
work  (Math.  Analysis  of  Logic,  p. 
21)  but  afterwards  rejected  it  in 
favour  of  vx  —  vy.  But  in  neither 
context  can  I  find  any  discussion  of 
the  real  difficulty  which  arises  when 
we  are  called  upon  to  decide  the 
limits  of  indefiniteness  to  be  assigned 
to  v.  It  may  be  remarked  that 
Leibnitz  with  his  usual  penetration, 
had  observed  that  particular  propo- 
sitions could  be  thus  expressed.  He 
says  (Difficultates  logics;  Erd.  p. 
102)  that  he  had  formerly  adopted 
the  following  scheme  :  '  Omne  A  est 
.B...seu  A  non  B  est  non-ens  :  Quod- 
dam  A  non  est  B...seu  A  non  B  est 
ens :  Nullum  A  est  B,  erit  AB  est  non 
ens :  Quoddam  A  est  B,  erit  AB  est 
ens '.  So  far  as  it  goes  this  exactly 
coincides  with  the  arrangement  a- 
dopted  above.  But  he  seems  to  have 


rejected  it  to  some  extent  afterwards, 
owing  to  the  consequent  difficulties 
about  the  conversion  of  propositions! 
But  I  find  his  discussion  of  the  sub- 
ject very  intricate  and  obscure. 

In  quite  recent  times  the  same 
arrangement  substantially  has  been 
adopted  by  Professer  F.  Brentano 
(Psychologic  vom  empirischen  Stand- 
punkte,  1874),  but  he  does  not  extend 
it  beyond  the  four  familiar  proposi- 
tions. He  announces  it  as  a  startling 
novelty  which  is  to  spread  dismay 
among  orthodox  logicians.  Like  some 
other  symbolists  he  springs  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  new  mode  of 
notation  is  to  supersede  altogether 
the  traditional  one;  instead  of  being, 
as  I  should  say,  an  alternative  method, 
not  necessarily  hostile  to  the  old  one, 
but  far  more  suitable  for  the  treat- 
ment of  complicated  problems  and 
broad  generalizations. 


160       Symbolic  expression  of  ordinary  propositions.  [CHAP. 

would  with  equal  readiness  be  thrown  into  the  familiar 
colloquial  statements,  '  There  are  such  things  as  a?'s  whicli 
are  not  y',  or  'o;'s  which  are  not  y  do  occur  sometimes'. 

We  have  thus  noticed  two  forms  of  particular  statement, 
one  of  these  being  our  substitute  for  the  ordinary  affirmative 
and  the  other  for  the  ordinary  negative  of  the  logical  treatises. 
But  it  is  obvious  that  when  we  lay  aside  logical  convention  in 
our  arrangements,  symmetry  and  consistency  will  call  for  two 
more  such  forms.  To  make  our  system  complete  in  this 
department  we  must  exhibit  it  thus  :  — 


xy  =  v. 

The  first  three  of  this  list  belong  to  forms  already  discussed 
and  familiar,  —  the  third  being  merely  'Some  y  is  not  x\ 
against  the  '  Some  x  is  not  y  '  of  the  second  ;  they  are  there- 
fore formally  identical.  But  the  fourth  is  not  a  familiar  form, 
at  least  in  logical  treatises.  It  would  commonly  be  expressed 
as  '  Some  not-x  is  not  y',  or  '  There  are  things  which  are 
neither  x  nor  y',  or  '  x  and  y  do  not  comprise  everything'. 

This  form  of  expressing  symbolically  the  particular  propo- 
sition though  not  new,  cannot  be  considered  familiar,  and 
therefore  a  little  more  discussion  of  it  will  not  be  out  of 
place.  That  it  cannot  be  considered  quite  to  coincide  with 
the  popular  view  must  be  admitted,  though  I  doubt  if  such 
departure  is  wider  than  in  the  case  of  the  common  Logic.  But 
as  regards  this  latter  I  can  never  feel  very  sure,  not  having 
been  able  to  determine  what  its  usage  may  be.  If  some 
logician  will  undertake  to  resolve  the  difficulties  indicated  in 
the  last  Chapter  (pp.  133  —  140),  laying  down  rules  which 
shall  be  consistent  with  some  view  of  the  nature  of  general 


vil.]      Symbolic  expression  of  ordinary  propositions.        167 

names  and  propositions  acceptable  at  the  present  day,  I  feel 
sure  that  every  thoughtful  reader  will  be  grateful  to  him. 

As  regards  the  relation  of  this  scheme  to  the  conventions 
of  popular  speech,  the  case  seems  to  me  as  follows.  In  all 
universal  propositions, — including  of  course  those  with  com- 
plex subjects  and  predicates — there  is  one  constant  element 
present,  and  one  only,  viz.  a  denial.  This  we  preserve, 
writing  'All  A  is  B'  and  ' No  A  is  B',  in  the  forms  AB  =  0, 
AB  =  0.  In  addition  to  this  there  is  an  element  which  is 
not  constantly  present,  viz.  one  of  implication  as  to  the 
existence  of  A  and  B.  This  we  reject,  or  rather  we  say  that 
when  required  it  must  be  separately  called  for.  Similarly,  in 
all  particular  propositions  there  is  a  constant  element,  viz. 
the  affirmation  of  existence.  Accordingly  we  write  '  Some  A 
is  B\  and  '  Some  A  is  not  B\  in  the  forms  AB  =  v,  AB  =  v. 
But  along  with  this  there  are  many  implications,  partly  con- 
nected with  the  word  '  some  'as  meaning  '  not  all,'  partly  with 
other  words  which  though  excluded  from  Logic  are  abundant 
in  common  speech,  such  as  'many',  'most',  &c.  All  these 
convey  information,  not  merely  as  to  the  existence  of  the  AB 
and  AB,  but  as  to  the  amount  of  it  present ;  and  all  these 
implications  we  reject. 

The  only  point  at  which  we  come  into  serious  conflict 
with  well  grounded  associations  is  in  refusing  to  deduce  the 
particular  from  the  universal.  From  '  All  A  is  B ',  we  cannot 
infer  'Some  A  is  B';  for  if  the  one  merely  destroys  AB,  and 
the  other  merely  saves  AB,  and  if  these  two  classes  are 
entirely  distinct  (as  of  course  they  are)  then  the  two  pro- 
positions clearly  do  not  come  into  contact  with  one  another 
at  any  point.  I  have  purposely  emphasized  this  objection 
in  order  to  bring  out  the  characteristics  of  this  mode  of 
treatment,  but  the  difficulty  is  not  so  formidable  as  it  may 
seem.  Popular  thought,  when  cautioned,  would  surely  agree 


168       Symbolic  expression  of  ordinary  propositions.  [CHAP. 

with  us  even  here.  Many  universal  propositions,  or  what 
the  logician  would  treat  as  such,  might  be  proposed  from 
which  every  one  would  feel  that  it  was  very  hazardous  to 
infer  a  particular.  We  do  not  infer  '  Some  A  is  B'  merely 
from  '  All  A  is  B',  but  from  this  proposition  taken  with  its 
rider,  'and  there  is  A,  and  £';  the  inference  therefore  falls  to 
the  ground  as  soon  as  we  agree  to  exclude  this  rider  from 
forming  any  necessary  part  of  the  proposition. 

Whenever  the  existence  of  the  subject  and  predicate  is 
claimed  and  duly  expressed,  the  inference  follows  on  the 
symbolic  notation  as  readily  as  on  any  other.  '  All  A  is  B, 
and  there  is  A'  would  be  expressed:  AB  =  0,  AB  =  v\  and 
'  Some  A  is  B '  would  merely  be  the  latter  part  of  this  expres- 
sion repeated  again,  viz.  AB  =  v.  In  other  words  the 
function  of  the  particular  affirmative  on  this  principle  is  that 
of  supplying  and  distinctly  formulating  the  implication 
which  common  thought  often  makes  as  a  matter  of  course  \ 

1  Herbart's  view  about  the  mode  baffling  result  0  =  0y,  as  the  limiting 

in  which  existential  propositions  are  value  of  x  =  xy).     On  the  contrary, 

connected  with  categoricals  is  curious,  the  predicate  being  then  unrestricted 

and,  though  not  the  same  as  that  and  unconditioned,  stands  by  itself, 

described   above,  comes  in  contact  and  the  sentence  takes  the  form  of 

with  it  at  several  points.     He  con-  an    existential    proposition.     '  Jene 

aiders  (Einleitung,  §  63)  that  the  scope  verwandelt  sich  in  das  zeichen  von 

of  the  predicate  in    affirmation    is  diesem  wcnn   fur  ein  Pradikat  das 

limited  and  conditioned  by  that  of  Subjekt  fehlt,   und  es  entsteht  auf 

the  subject.    Therefore  the  greater  dieser  Weise  ein    existential  Satz.' 

the  depth  and  the  less  the  breadth  of  Elsewhere  (Hauptpunkte  der  Loyik) 

the  subject  notion,  the  less  will  be  he  compares  the  condition  of   the 

the  breadth  of  the  predicate.    Now  predicate  when  the  subject  vanishes 

conceive  the  limiting  case  in  which  to  that  of  the  second  member  of  the 

the  subject  disappears,  BO  that  we  equation  S=x?,  when  a  =  0,  and  we 

have  in  its  place  merely  'it  in',  or  have  5  =  1. 

'there  is',  connected  with  a  predicate.  I  cannot  accept  this  account  of 
We  cannot  suppose  the  predicate  to  the  process,  and  the  whole  discus- 
have  vanished  too,  or  there  would  be  sion  is  as  usual  too  much  cast 
110  proposition  (it  would  be  the  into  'BegrifT  language  to  fit  in 


vii.]      Symbolic  expression  of  ordinary  propositions.        169 

This  must  suffice  for  the  present  treatment  of  these 
troublesome  propositions.  All  symbolists,  I  think,  however 
satisfactory  they  may  consider  their  own  solution  of  the 
difficulty  to  be,  are  practically  agreed  in  having  very  little  to 
do  with  them  in  the  course  of  their  work.  And  quite  rightly 
so.  Indeed  I  greatly  question  whether,  if  the  Symbolic 
Logic  had  been  developed  before  the  Aristotelian  had  ac- 
quired so  firm  a  hold  upon  us,  such  propositions  would  have 
been  admitted  at  all.  To  exclude  them  from  our  rules  would 
only  be  a  slightly  greater  encroachment  upon  the  full  freedom 
of  popular  speech  than  has  been  already  brought  about  by 
the  exclusion  of  such  terms  as  '  many', '  most',  and  others  of  a 
somewhat  quantitative  character.  Particular  propositions, 
in  their  common  acceptation,  are  of  a  somewhat  temporary 
and  unscientific  character.  Science  seeks  for  the  universal, 
and  will  not  be  fully  satisfied  until  it  has  attained  it.  Indefi- 
niteness  indeed  in  respect  of  the  predicate  cannot,  or  need 
not,  always  be  avoided ;  but  the  indefiniteness  of  the  subject, 
which  is  the  essential  characteristic  of  the  particular  proposi- 
tion, mostly  can  and  should  be  avoided.  For  we  can  very 
often  succeed  at  last  in  determining  the  'some';  so  that 
instead  of  saying  vaguely  that  '  Some  A  is  B\  we  can  put 
it  more  accurately  by  stating  that  'The  A  which  is  C  is  B\ 
when  of  course  the  proposition  instantly  becomes  universal1. 

readily    with    such    a    purely  class  means    in    the    passages    criticized 

theory  as    ours.      But  the  passage  above.    But  neither  usage  nor  scien- 

deserves  notice  as   one  of  the   ex-  tific    requirements  permit   such  an 

tremely  rare  instances,  till  recently,  assumption.     'Some    B '    does    not 

of  the  examination  in  Logic  of  one  of  necessarily  mean    '  the  B  which  is 

those  limiting  cases  with  which  every  marked  out  by  the  possession  of  some 

mathematician  is  so  familiar.  common   attribute  A\     There  may 

1  If  we    could    always    do  this,  be  no  such  common  attribute  what- 

particular    propositions    might     of  ever  so  far  as  we  know,  (as  in  the 

course  be  suppressed  altogether ;  and  instance  of  the  throws  of  the  penny 

this  is  possibly  what  Prof.  Jevons  offered  above)  except  that  which  is 


170       Symbolic  expression  of  ordinary  propositions.  [CHAP. 

Propositions  which  resist  such  treatment  and  remain  in- 
curably particular  are  comparatively  rare:  their  hope  and 
aim  is  to  be  treated  statistically,  and  so  to  be  admitted 
into  the  theory  of  Probability.  The  relative  importance  of 
really  particular  propositions  is,  I  think,  vastly  exaggerated  in 
the  common  syllogistic  treatment,  where  nearly  half  the 
members  are  particular.  But  this  is  almost  unavoidable 
owing  to  the  extreme  narrowness  of  that  scheme.  We  cannot 
afford  to  be  very  scrupulous  in  what  we  reject  when  we 
are  thus  confined  to  three  terms  and  propositions,  and  are  not 
allowed  to  resort  to  negative  subjects  and  predicates.  Accord- 
ingly we  have  to  welcome  there  what  the  symbolist  with 
his  abundant  resources  may  well  afford  to  dispense  with1. 

We  can  now  in  conclusion  exhibit  a  complete  scheme 
of  prepositional  forms  as  suggested  by  the  capabilities  and 
requirements  of  our  symbolic  method.  We  will  suppose  two 
terms  only,  #  and  y  ;  these  lead  to  the  following  forms : — 

xy  =  0,        xy  =  v,        xy  =  1, 

xy  =  0,         xy  =  v,         xy  =  1, 

xy  =  0,         xy  =  v,        xy  =  1, 

xy=Q,         xy=v,         xy=\. 

The  significance  of  these  various  forms  will  be  quite  plain 
from  what  has  been  already  said.  They  must  be  regarded  as 
elementary  statements,  and  as  containing  all  the  elementary 
statements  attainable  with  two  class-terms. 

mentioned  in  the  predicate,  in  which  mits  the  values  0  and  1  as  possible  to 
case  the  conversion  of  it  into  a  every  class  term,  how  does  he  express 
universal  would  merely  result  in  an  the  conventional  sense  of  particular 
identical  proposition.  (The  additional  propositions?  If  he  denies  these 
difficulties  introduced  hy  denying  the  values  how  does  he  express  any  pro- 
values  0  and  1  to  any  simple  class  position  of  a  complex  kind  ?  I  accept 
term  are  extraneous  to  the  subject.)  the  former,  and  meet  the  difficulty  by 
1  The  alternative  which  every  admitting  a  third  value  v  for  proposi- 
symboliBt  has  to  face  here  may  be  tions  which  are  incurably  particular, 
concisely  expressed  thus  : — If  he  ad- 


viz.]       Symbolic  expression  of  ordinary  propositions.       171 

(1)  In  the  first  column  we  declare  that  such  and  such  a 
compartment  is  empty,  that  is,  that  the  corresponding  class  is 
unrepresented  in  our  universe.     This  grouping  of  such  propo- 
sitions of  course  differs  considerably  from  the  customary  one. 
The  first  of  the  four  is  always  naturally  couched  in  a  negative 
form  in  ordinary  language  and  logic,  whereas  the  second  and 
third  generally  appear  as  affirmatives.     The  fourth  again  has 
no  precise  logical  equivalent,  the  exactest  popular  equivalent 
being  '  There  is  nothing  but  what  is  either  x  or  y\     I  call 
attention  the  more  expressly  to  this  point  as  it  enforces  the 
opinion,  laid  down  in  the  introductory  chapter,  that  there  can 
be   no  absolute   arrangement  of  prepositional  forms.     The 
number  and  grouping  of  our  forms  must  depend  upon  the 
fundamental  view  we  take  as  to  what  should  be  the  import 
of  a  proposition. 

(2)  In  the  second  column  we  declare  that  such  and  such 
a  compartment  is  occupied,  that  is,  that  the  class  is  repre- 
sented.    The  only  trouble  here  is  in  settling  the  degree  of 
indefiniteness  to   be  assigned  to  v.     Fortunately  for  us,  in 
such  a  notation  as  this,  there  are  almost  no  acquired  as- 
sociations to  be  attended  to,  so  we  may  define  freely  accord- 
ing to  our  judgment.     That  being  so,  it  would  seem  best  to 
lay  it  down  that  v  shall  be  perfectly  indefinite,  except  that  it 
excludes  0  and  1.     This  of  course  makes  the  second  column 
intermediate  between   the   first  and  the  third.     The  exact 
meaning  of  this  form  of  proposition  is  that  a  portion,  and  a 
portion  only,  of  the  things  in  our  universe  are   found  to 
belong  to  the  class  in  question ;  the  remainder  of  them  being 
distributed  in  some  way,  we  know  not  how,  amongst  the 
other  three  conceivable  classes.     The  particular  propositions 
of  ordinary  logic  are  best  assigned  to  this  class ;  for,  though  not 
always  precise  in  their  signification,  yet  when  they  are  made 
precise  they  most  naturally  take  up  the  meaning  here  assigned. 


172       Symbolic  expression  of  ordinary  propositions.  [CHAP. 

(3)  In  the  third  column  we  declare  that  the  compart- 
ment is  not  only  occupied,  but  occupied  to  the  exclusion  of 
all  else ;  that  that  class,  and  that  class  only,  is  represented. 
Here  we  make  a  complete  departure  from  the  familiar  forms 
of  ordinary  logic,  no  one  of  its  recognized  propositions  coin- 
ciding with  anything  in  this  column.  Popular  language 
would  express  xy  —  1  in  the  words  'Everything  is  both  x  and  y ', 
whilst  xy  =  1  would  stand  as  'Everything  is  neither  x  nor  y\ 
or  'Nothing  is  x,  and  nothing  is  y\ 

We  might  of  course  easily  express  all  three  columns  in 
the  generalized  form  xy  =  w,  provided  we  make  w  perfectly 
general ;  that  is,  regard  it  as  a  general  term  standing,  as  the 
case  may  be,  for  any  of  the  values  0,  v,  1.  We  shall  have 
occasion  to  treat  it  so  when  we  come  to  the  consideration 
of  the  Aristotelian  syllogism  in  a  future  chapter. 

It  must  be  observed  that  every  one  of  the  above  forms 
readily  gives  rise  to  a  corresponding  alternative.  This  result 
follows  symbolically  from  the  fundamental  formula  connecting 
our  class  terms,  xy  +  xy  +  xy  +  xy  =  1 ;  or,  logically,  from  the 
fact  that  every  existing  thing  must  belong  to  one  or  other  of 
the  four  classes  thus  indicated.  In  this  case  since  the  prepo- 
sitional forms  with  which  we  are  concerned  are  of  the 
simplest  character,  dealing  with  one  sub-class  only,  the  corre- 
sponding alternative  will  be  somewhat  complex,  for  it  will 
have  to  deal  with  the  remaining  three  classes. 

There  is  no  need  to  go  in  detail  through  all  the  applica- 
tions of  this  principle,  as  the  reader  will  find  it  easy  enough 
to  work  them  out  for  himself,  but  it  will  be  well  just  to  take;. 
one  from  each  column  as  a  sample.  For  instance  xy  —  Q 
yields  the  alternative  xy  +  xy  +  xy  =  I)  the  two  forms  being 
precisely  equivalent  and  convertible.  Put  into  words  this 
amounts  to  saying  that  it  is  exactly  the  same  thing  to  assert 
that '  No  x  is  y',  or  that '  Everything  is  either  x  and  not  y, 


VII.]       Symbolic  expression  of  ordinary  propositions.        173 

« 

y  and  not  as,  or  neither  x  nor  y\  which  of  course  it  is.  The 
second  column  yields  a  somewhat  different  kind  of  alterna- 
tive. From  xy  =  v  we  deduce  xy  +  xy  +  xy  =  1  —  v.  Now 
1  —  v  has  exactly  the  same  significance  as  v,  for  this  was 
defined  to  be  indefinite  between  0  and  1  exclusively.  Hence 
the  alternative  form  might  equally  be  written 

xy  +  xy  +  xy  =  v. 

The  meaning  of  this  is  easily  assignable,  for  just  as  xy  =  v 
meant  'There  are  such  things  as  xy^so  the  longer  alternative 
means  '  There  are  such  things  as  either  xy,  xy,  or  xy'.  It  is 
of  course  a  very  indefinite,  and  not  very  useful,  form,  for  it 
simply  assures  us  that  one  or  more  of  three  classes,  we  know 
not  which,  is  represented. 

There  only  remains  the  corresponding  alternative  in  the 
third  column.  This  yields  a  slightly  different  result  from  either 
of  the  foregoing ;  for  we  thus  obtain,  not  a  disjunctive  of  a 
positive  kind,  but  a  series  of  categorical  negatives.  That  -is, 
if  xy  =  \,  then  xy  +  xy  +  xy  must  equal  0,  a  conclusion  which 
as  will  be  shown  hereafter  necessitates  the  three  separate 
conclusions  xy  =  0,  xy  =  0,  xy  =  0.  Logically  this  is  clear 
enough,  for  if  '  Everything  is  xy',  then  certainly  '  Nothing  is 
xy,  xy  or  xy';'ih&t  is,  to  crowd  everything  into  one  compart- 
ment is  to  cause  every  other  compartment  to  lie  empty. 

This  will  be  a  convenient  place  for  noticing  the  charge 
which  has  been  repeatedly  brought  against  Boole's  system, — 
and  presumably  against  every  analogous  system  of  Symbolic 
Logic, — -that  it  is  forced  to  adopt  the  Hamiltonian  doctrine  of 
the  Quantification  of  the  Predicate.  Thus  Mr  Lindsay  says, 
"The  doctrines  contained  in  this  New  Analytic  of  logical 
forms  lead  directly  to  the  theories  of  Boole  and  Jevons.  A 
leading  characteristic  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Quantification  of 
the  Predicate,  and  other  recent  theories  of  a  similar  kind,  is 
the  attempt  to  assimilate  all  propositions  to  the  type  of 


174       Symbolic  expression  of  ordinary  propositions.  [CHAP. 

mathematical  identities...1";  and  Prof.  Jevons  goes  further  by 
declaring  that  "Dr  Boole,  employing  this  fundamental  idea 
[of  Quantification]  as  his  starting-point,"  arrived  at  such  and 
such  results8. 

The  assertion  that  Boole's  system  is  in  any  way  founded 
on  the  doctrine  of  the  Quantification  of  the  Predicate, — is,  in 
fact,  not  directly  hostile  to  that  doctrine, — is  so  astonishing 
that  one  is  inclined  to  suspect  some  lurking  confusion  of 
meaning.  So  I  will  just  remark  that  what  I  understand  by 
the  doctrine  is  this: — Whereas  the  ordinary  forms  of  proposi- 
tion leave  it  uncertain  whether  we  are  speaking  of  the  whole 
predicate,  or  part  only,  in  affirmation,  and  decide  that  we  must 
be  speaking  of  the  whole  predicate  in  negation ;  we  thus 
leave  four  possibilities  unrecognized :  that  in  fact  we  may  think 
the  predicate  either  as  a  whole  or  as  a  part,  and  must  think 
it  as  one  of  the  two,  in  both  affirmation  and  negation  alike. 
Moreover,  since  what  exists  in  thought  should  be  expressed 
in  words,  a  really  complete  scheme  of  propositions  demands, 
and  is  satisfied  by,  eight  forms.  There  is  surely  no  doubt  that 
this  is  the  sense  in  which  Hamilton,  and  his  authorized  ex- 
ponent Prof.  Baynes,  understood  the  doctrine. 

Now  though  it  seems  hard  upon  ordinary  predicates  thus  to 
charge  them  with  secretly  quantifying,  it  may  be  brought 
against  them  that  at  least  they  have  nowhere  denied  that 
they  do  so.  But  with  Boole's  system  it  is  otherwise.  If  the 
wit  of  man  had  sought  about  for  some  expression  which 
should  unequivocally  and  even  ostentatiously  reject  this 
unfortunate  doctrine,  what  better  could  be  found  than  a;  =  $y 

1  Translation  of  Ueberweg's  Logic,  Boole  himself  expressly  states  that  he 

p.  668 : — I  am  not  sure  to  what  ex-  takes  the  four  old  forms  of  proposi- 

tcnt  Mr  Lindsay  is  responsible  for  tion  "with  little  variation  from  the 

this  part,  as  it  is  actually  contributed  Treatises  of  Aldrich  and  Whately." 

by  another  writer,  Prof.  W  .B.  Smith.  (Math.  Anal,  of  Logic,  p.  20.) 

*  Sulftitution  of  Similars,  p.  4: — 


Vll.]      Symbolic  expression  of  ordinary  propositions.        175 

for  such  a  purpose  ?  So  far  from  quantifying  the  predicate, 
by  specifying  whether  we  take  some  only  or  all  of  it,  we 
select  a  form  which  startles  the  ordinary  logician  by  the  un- 
customary language  in  which  it  announces  that  it  does  not  at 
all  mean  to  state  whether  some  only,  or  all,  or  even  none  is  to 
be  taken.  The  negative  equivalent,  acy  =  0,  is  just  as  resolute 
not  to  commit  itself  on  this  point;  whilst,  as  I  have  pointed 
out,  as  =  xy  is  a  precisely  synonymous  expression.  It  is  diffi- 
cult to  conjecture  how  these  symbolic  forms  could  be  thus 
connected  with  Hamilton's  doctrine,  unless  by  a  hasty  con- 
clusion from  the  fact  that  both  systems  adopt  the  equational 
form. 

We  have  thus  discussed  categoricals  with  sufficient  ful- 
ness, and  have  touched  incidentally  upon  disjunctives.  It 
will  readily  be  seen  why  we  have  not  found  occasion  to  say 
more  about  the  latter  kind  of  proposition.  The  reason  is  that 
on  our  system  they  do  not  differ  from  categoricals  in  any  re- 
spect of  serious  importance.  The  only  difference  in  them 
is  that  their  subjects  or  predicates,  or  both,  are  composed 
of  two  or  more  class  terms  instead  of  one  only.  To  the 
common  logic  this  may  involve  a  real  distinction,  but  on  any 
class  view  it  is  of  no  significance,  since  these  groups  composed 
of  two  or  more  classes  are  really  classes  all  the  same.  In 
xy  =  1  we  declare  that  a  single  class  constitutes  the  universe, 
whilst  in  ocy  -\-  xy  +  xy  =  1,  we  declare  that  three  such  classes 
collectively  constitute  it ;  but  this  difference  does  not  essen- 
tially alter  the  kind  of  proposition. 

Suppose,  for  instance,  we  are  given  a;  +  y  =  a  +  b,  (as  and 
y,  as  also  a  and  b,  being  supposed  exclusives).  Categorically 
described,  this  declares  that  the  members  embraced  col- 
lectively by  the  two  former  classes  are  identical  with  those 
so  embraced  by  the  two  latter.  It  then  really  forms  only  one 
proposition.  Or  we  might  express  it  in  two  paiigof  ordinary 


176       Symbolic  expression  of  ordinary  propositions.  [CHAP. 

disjunctives  by  saying  '  Every  x  is  either  a  or  b',  and  'Every  y 
is  either  a  or  b' ;  adding  the  corresponding  assertions  about 
every  a  and  b  being  either  x  or  y.  Or  we  might  make  a  more 
complicated  proposition  with  disjunctive  subject  and  predicate, 
by  saying  that  whatever  is  either  x  or  y  is  either  a  or  b,  and 
vice  versa.  Some  licence  of  phraseology  is  allowed  on  every 
system ;  even  the  common  universal  affirmative  may  be  read 
as  '  All  x  is  y',  or  '  Every  a;  is  y';  what  we  do  is  to  insist  that 
this  licence  shall  be  rather  wide.  Provided  the  class  facts 
asserted  remain  unchanged,  we  claim  to  make  almost  any 
verbal  statement  about  them  that  we  please. 

The  nature  of  the  Hypothetical  Proposition  and  the 
desirability  or  otherwise  of  assigning  it  a  special  symbolic 
form  will  be  best  reserved  for  a  future  chapter. 

A  few  examples  of  propositions  are  added,  in  order  to 
illustrate  the  use  of  our  symbolic  expressions,  as  explained  in 
the  course  of  this  and  preceding  chapters.  The  reader  will 
observe  that  we  purposely  employ  sometimes  one,  and  some- 
times another,  of  the  various  alternative  forms  of  the  Univer- 
sal Affirmative  which  were  noticed  at  the  commencement  of 
this  chapter. 

1.  '  Men  who  are  honest  and  pious  will  never  fail  to  be 
respected  though  poor  and  illiterate,  provided  they  be  self- 
supporting,  but  not  if  they  are  paupers'.  As  explained,  the 
various  particles  here  used  must  all  alike  be  replaced  by  the 
mere  symbols  of  connection,  so  that  the  proposition  may 
be  phrased  as  follows: — All  honest  (a),  pious  (6),  poor  (c), 
illiterate  (d),  self-supporting  (e),  are  respected  (/) ;  and  no 
honest,  pious,  poor,  illiterate,  self-supporting  paupers  (g)  are 
respected. 

(abcde  (1  -/)  =  °> 
(abcdefg          =  0. 

Of  course  when,  as  here,  a  whole  group  of  terms  presents 


VII.]      Symbolic  expression  of  ordinary  propositions.       177 

itself  which  does  not  demand  analysis  into  its  details,  we  may 
substitute  a  single  letter  for  the  group.  Thus  Ave  might 
replace  abode  by  a  single  letter. 

2.  '  No  a;  can  be  both  a  and  6  ;  and,  of  the  two  c  and  e, 
every  x  must  be  one  or  other  only'.     This  may  be  written  in 
one  sentence, 

x  =  x  (1  —  db)  (ce  +  ce), 
or  in  two,  separately, 

(xab  —  0, 

[ac  (ce  +  ce)  =  0. 

In  the  one  case  we  make  a  single  Affirmative  out  of  the 
proposition;  in  the  other  we  couch  this  in  the  form  of  its 
two  constituent  elements  of  denial. 

3.  '  Every  a  is  one  only  of  the  two  as  and  y,  except  when 
it  is  z  or  w ;   in  the  former  of  which  cases  it  is  both  x  and  y, 
and  in  the  latter  case  neither  of  them'.     This  may  be  ex- 
pressed in  three  sentences : 

a,  that  is  neither  z  nor  w,  is  x  or  y  only,  azw  =  $  (xy  +  xy), 
a,  that  is  z,  is  both  x  and  y,  az  =  $  xy, 

a,  that  is  w,  is  neither  x  nor  y,  aw  =  §  xy, 

or,  in  one  sentence,  and  without  the  express  sign  of  indefini- 
tude,  a  =  a  [zw  (xy  +  xy)  +  zwxy  +  zwxy}. 

4.  As  an  example  of  translating   symbols   into   words, 
take  the  following  : — 

a  +  a  (1  —  ce}. 

Here  ce  stands  for  what  fails  to  be  c  and  fails  to  be  e,  so  that 
I  —  ce  stands  for  all  that  does  not  so  fail.  Hence  the  given 
expression  may  be  read  off,  '  Anything  which  is  a ;  or  even 
not  a,  provided  that  in  this  case  it  does  not  fail  both  to  be  c 
and  to  be  e'. 

An  alternative  symbolic  statement  here  would  be  1  — 
v.L.  12 


178       Symbolic  expression  of  ordinary  propositions.  [CHAP. 

(since  a  +  a  =  1).     It  might  then  be  read  off,  '  All  that  does 
not  fail  to  be  a,  c  and  e '. 

5.  *  Every  member  of  the  Committee  (x)  is  a  Protes- 
tant (a),  and  either  a  Conservative  (c),  or  Liberal  (e} ;  except 
the  Home  Rulers  (?/),  who  are  none  of  the  three'. 

x  =  x  {ya  (c  -t-  ce)  +  yace}. 

If  we  are  supposed  to  know  that  Conservative  and  Liberal 
are  exclusives,  we  may  put  c  +  e  for  c  +  ce.  The  best  way 
perhaps  of  interpreting  the  symbolic  sentence  here  is  just  to 
substitute  the  significant  words,  when  it  would  stand : — 
Every  member  of  the  Committee  is  a  member  of  the 
Committee  who  is  not  a  Home  Ruler,  (and  then  he  is  a 
Protestant,  and  either  a  Conservative  or  a  Non-Conservative 
Liberal),  or  he  is  one  who  is  a  Home  Rulerj  and  then  he  is 
neither  Protestant,  Conservative,  nor  Liberal. 

6.  xy  •+  xy  +  z  (xy  +  xy). 

This  may  be  read  off, '  x  or  y  only ;  or,  provided  there  be  z, 
both  x  and  y  or  neither  of  them'.  An  alternative  symbolic 
statement  would  be  1  —  z  (xy  +  xy),  which  might  be  read, 
'  All  excepting  what  is  not  z,  but  is  both  or  neither  x  and  y\ 

7.  As  an   illustration  of  the  symbolic   signification  of 
particular  propositions  we  may  take  the  following  : — '  Every 
ab  is  either  x  or  y  only,  and  it  is  known  that  there  are  some 
a  which  are  x  and  some  6  which  are  not  y'. 

If  the  latter  clauses  were  omitted,  the  sentence  would  be 
written  simply : — 

d>  =  $  (*y  +  «y). 

This  would  merely  obliterate  the  two  classes  abxy  and  dbxy, 
leaving  the  remaining  14  classes  perfectly  indeterminate, 
subject  to  the  formal  condition  that  one  at  least  of  them 
must  be  represented.  Now  the  statement '  Some  a  is  a;',  or, 
'  There  are  such  things  as  ax',  puts  a  check  upon  the  destruc- 


vii.]      Symbolic  expression  of  ordinary  propositions.       179 

tion  of  ax,  insisting  that  some  one  at  least  of  its  four  consti- 
tuents (or  rather  three,  since  abxy  is  gone)  shall  be  saved. 
Bat  it  does  not  tell  us  which  of  them  is  thus  rescued. 
Similarly,  '  There  is  b  which  is  not  y '  saves  some  one  at  least 
of  the  three  surviving  elements  of  by.  On  the  diagrammatic 
scheme  this  would  be  carried  out  by  our  taking  a  note,  so  to 
say,  that  the  whole  compartments  ax  and  by  were  not  to 
be  shaded  out  in  any  case. 


12—2 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

THE  UNIVERSE  OF  DISCOURSE. 

WE  have  had  repeated  occasion  to  refer  to  the  Logical 
Universe  of  Discourse  in  the  foregoing  chapters,  but  the 
present  will  be  the  best  opportunity  for  completing  what  it  is 
necessary  to  say  upon  this  point.  As  in  other  parts  of  our 
subject,  there  are  three  main  topics  of  enquiry  before  us ; 
for,  in  trying  to  rearrange  things  in  accordance  with  the 
principles  of  Symbolic  Logic,  we  cannot  afford  to  pass  over 
either  the  conclusions  of  unassisted  common  sense,  or  the 
rules  and  assumptions  of  the  logicians. 

As  regards  then  the  popular  way  of  thinking,  the  question 
of  course  is  this.  When  we  make  use  of  names  and  resort 
to  reasonings,  what  limits  of  reference,  if  any,  do  we  make  ? 
What  is  the  range  of  subject  matter  about  which  we  con- 
sider ourselves  to  be  speaking  ?  I  think  we  must  answer  that 
as  regards  negative  terms  we  always  make  very  considerable 
restrictions,  and  that  as  regards  positive  terms  we  only  some- 
times make  them,  and  then  comparatively  slight  ones1.  The 

1  True   negative   names    of   the      popular  speech,  but  are  mainly  an 
type  'not  X1  are  not  very  frequent  in      invention  of  the  logician.     Still  they 


CHAP,  viii.]          The  universe  of  discourse.  181 

limits  of  positive  terms  are  generally  settled  very  readily  : 
we  all  know  what  is  in  most  cases  meant  to  be  included 
under  the  name  'black'.  But  what  does  'not-black 'include? 
Does  it  apply  to  all  things  without  exception  to  which  the 
colour  black  cannot  be  applied ;  including,  say,  the  Geological 
Glacial  Period,  the  sources  of  the  Nile,  the  claims  of  the 
Papacy,  the  last  letter  of  Clarissa  Harlowe,  and  the  wishes 
of  our  remote  posterity  ?  Clearly  not :  some  kind  of  limit, 
more  or  less  restricted,  is  generally  understood  to  be  drawn ; 
but  where  exactly  it  may  be  traced  must  depend  upon  the 
nature  of  the  subject  and  the  associations  of  the  speaker. 

This  distinction  between  the  application  of  positive  and 
that  of  negative  names  is  in  great  part  of  a  comparatively 
verbal  character.  It  is  not  because  a  name  is  negative  that 
we  commonly  have  to  refer  to  a  part  only  of  its  denotation, 
but  because  certain  classes  are  tolerably  definite  and  often 
have  to  be  referred  to  as  a  whole,  that  we  confer  a  positive 
name  upon  them,  the  heterogeneous  multitude  outside  falling 
to  the  share  of  the  corresponding  negative  name.  But  of 
course,  when  we  have  got  this  comparatively  definite  name, 
it  does  not  follow  that  we  must  in  every  case  refer  to  the 
whole  of  it,  especially  when  it  is  itself  a  somewhat  extensive 

do  occur  sometimes  both  in  subject  is  indisputably  true.     (We  must  re- 

and  predicate,  when  the  classes  indi-  member  to  keep  clear  of  the  Quanti- 

cated  by  them  happen  to  be  narrower,  fication    dispute    here.    In    such  a 

or  more  conveniently  assigned,  than  proposition  as '  some  contractions  are 

those  indicated  by  the  corresponding  involuntary',  the  question  now  before 

affirmative  names: — e.g.  'What  is  not  us  is  not  as  to  how  much  of  the 

conceivable  is  no  fit  subject  of  instruc-  whole  extent  of    the   'involuntary' 

tion '.     Of  course  if  we  class  with  is  present  in  thought  in  the  propo- 

these,    as   I   think   we    must,   such  sition,  but  rather  as  to  what  we  are 

names  as  'inhuman',   'unnatural',  to  consider  is  that  whole  extent  when 

and  so  forth,  what  is  here  said  about  we  come  to  reflect  upon  what  has 

the  very  great  restriction  with  which  been  said.) 
their  extent  is  commonly  interpreted, 


182  The  universe  of  discourse.  [CHAP. 

one.  Hence  we  constantly  make  assertions  about  'all  men ' 
without  the  slightest  intention  of  being  bound  by  our  words 
beyond  a  reference  to  a  comparatively  small  selection  of 
mankind. 

The  same  general  question  is  sometimes  practically  raised 
in  another  form  by  enquiring  whether  we  have  any  pairs  of 
terms  in  our  language  which  are  strictly  contradictories. 
That  we  have  plenty  of  formal  contradictories,  such  as  good 
and  not-good,  human  and  inhuman,  &c.,  is  obvious  enough  ; 
but  what  is  here  sought  for  is  rather  a  pair  of  material  con- 
tradictories, which  shall  be  logically  contradictory  in  their 
current  use  and  application.  The  reply  must  be,  as  above, 
that  language  being  relative  to  human  wants  every  pair  of 
contradictories  is  restricted  to  some  tolerably  well  understood 
universe.  Such  restriction  is  commonly  more  constant  in  the 
case  of  material  than  in  the  case  of  formal  contradictories; 
for  each  of  the  pair  being  a  so-called  positive,  and  a  natural 
instead  of  an  artificial  term,  each  carries  its  customary 
limitation  of  signification  with  it :  thus  British  and  alien  are 
equivalent  to  British  and  not-British,  provided  we  under- 
stand that  we  are  talking  only  of  human  beings.  Not- 
British  being  an  artificial  word  its  range  of  application  may 
be  very  variable,  but  legal  and  customary  usage  have  decided 
much  more  rigorously  to  what  objects  the  word  'alien'  shall 
be  rightly  applied. 

We  must  now  notice  briefly  what  the  ordinary  logician 
has  to  say  upon  the  matter.  The  use  of  this  word  universe 
was  first  made  familiar  by  De  Morgan ',  but  the  conception 
itself  is  one  that  is  suggested  at  more  than  one  point  in  the 
traditional  treatment.  For  instance  the  doctrine  of  a  sum- 
mum  genus  is  connected  with  the  present  enquiry ;  involving, 

1  Camb.  Phil.  Tr.  vin.  880.    He      technical  term ". 
speaks  there  of  "inventing  a  new 


viii.]  The  universe  of  discourse.  183 

as  it  does,  the  necessity  of  some  restriction  upon  the  extent 
of  the  class  which  we  take  into  account.  But  where  the 
need  of  some  restriction  of  the  kind  seems  mostly  felt  is  in 
the  discussions  about  the  nature  of  'infinite'  or  indefinite 
terms  and  propositions.  I  have  no  wish  to  enter  into  that 
Serbonian  bog  further  than  one  not  brought  up  in  those  parts 
may  venture  with  safety,  and  will  therefore  merely  refer  to 
the  form  in  which  this  doctrine  was  held  by  a  very  eminent 
thinker  who  was  but  little  restrained  by  traditions  of  the 
past.  Students  of  Kant  will  remember  the  three-fold  divi- 
sion of  propositions  which  he  makes,  in  respect  of  their  quan- 
tity, into  positive,  negative,  and  infinite.  Verbally,  of  course, 
it  is  easy  enough  to  say  that  we  must  either  assert  that  A  is 
B,  or  deny  that  it  is  B,  or  (couching  the  latter  in  affirmative 
form)  assert  that  A  is  not-5 ;  and  we  may  readily  admit  that 
there  is  some  conventional  difference  of  signification  between 
these  various  cases.  But  is  there  any  difference  whatever,  of 
which  logic  should  take  account,  between  the  last  two  ?  On 
any  rigid  class  view  of  the  nature  of  predicates  it  is 
impossible  to  extract  more  than  two  divisions ;  for,  that  to 
exclude  a  thing  from  a  boundary  is  to  include  it  somewhere 
outside  that  boundary,  that  to  deny  that  any  thing  has  a 
given  attribute  is  to  assert  that  it  has  not  that  attribute, 
seems  indubitably  clear.  I  suppose  that  the  idea  underlying 
the  distinction  is  this.  When  we  deny  that  A  is  B  we  think 
of  A  as  a  whole,  and  B  as  an  attribute  and  therefore  as  a 
whole,  so  that  the  judgment  is  finite  in  both  terms.  But 
when  we  say  that  A  is  not-5  and  try  to  consider  this  not-^ 
as  an  attribute,  we  have  forced  upon  our  notice  the  vague 
amplitude  of  its  extent;  and  therefore,  when  we  do  not 
make  appeal  to  a  limited  universe,  we  must  recognize  that 
the  judgment  is  in  respect  of  its  predicate  an  infinite  or 
indefinite  one. 


184  The  universe  of  discourse.  [CHAP. 

Whether  I  am  right  or  wrong  in  this  last  remark  it  will 
equally  serve  to  call  attention  to  the  view  which  the  Symbo- 
lic logician  is  bound  to  adopt.  Taking,  as  we  do,  a  strict 
class  view  of  the  nature  of  propositions  we  meet  the  difficulty 
by  flatly  denying  that  the  class  not-JT  need  be  more  'infinite', 
or  in  any  way  more  extensive  even,  than  X.  The  notion  that 
it  is  so  is  simply  a  survival  from  the  traditions  of  common 
speech  and  is  one  of  which  the  symbolist  should  rid  himself 
as  speedily  as  possible.  Not-X  is  of  course  always  the 
contradictory  of  X,  but  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that 
the  former  symbol  is  more  appropriately  applied  to  classes 
which  are  essentially  negative  or  are  popularly  regarded  as 
such1.  There  may  be  practical  reasons  of  convenience  for 
thus  assigning  our  symbols,  but  as  far  as  any  reasons  of 
principle  are  concerned  we  might  exchange  X  and  not-X  all 
through  our  logical  processes  without  the  slightest  change  of 
symbolic  significance.  There  is  nothing  to  hinder  us  from 
putting  not-JT  to  stand  for  the  few  and  highly  specialized 
members  of  some  narrow  class,  and  X  for  the  innumerable 
and  heterogeneous  individuals  which  do  not  belong  to  it. 

When  thus  regarded,  the  conception  of  a  universe  is  seen 
to  be  strictly  speaking  extra-logical ;  it  is  entirely  a  question 
of  the  application  of  our  formulae,  not  of  their  symbolic 
statement.  It  is  quite  true  that  we  always  do  recognize  a 

1  I  cannot  therefore  agree  with  It  deserves  notice  that  one  of  tho 
Prof.  Wundt  when  he  says  (Logik,  earliest  writers  to  apply  symbolic 
233)  that 'Boole's  yiew  rests  upon  the  notation  to  Logic, — Segner, — has 
wide  spread  logical  error  according  to  called  attention  to  this  indifferent 
which  the  concept  non-4  is  referred  symbolic  application  of  X  and  not- A', 
to  the  infinitude  of  the  concept  Employing  ( - )  to  mark  the  contra- 
world'.  (It  seems  to  me  that  Prof.  dictory,  he  says  that  if  we  like  to  put 
Wundt's  treatment  of  his  subject  is  X  for  non-triangulum  then  -  X  will 
in  several  places  somewhat  marred  stand  for  triangulum,  (Specimen 
by  his  not  having  shaken  off  the  Logica,  p.  71.) 
language  and  tone  of  concept  ualibiu.) 


viii.]  TJie  universe  of  discourse.  185 

limit,  sometimes  express  but  more  often  tacit,  as  to  the 
extent  over  which  not-JT  is  to  be  allowed  to  range ;  and  also 
that  we  not  unfrequently  do  so  in  respect  of  X  itself,  so  long 
as  these  expressions  are  set  before  us  in  words  and  not  in 
symbols  only.  Between  them,  X  and  not-X  must  fill  up  the 
whole  field  of  our  logical  enquiry ;  they  can  leave  nothing 
unaccounted  for  there.  But  when  the  question  is  asked, 
How  wide  is  that  field  ?  the  only  answer  that  can  be  given  is, 
just  as  wide  as  we  choose  in  any  case  to  make  it.  Whether 
the  practical  imposition  of  these  limits  does  most  to  curtail 
the  range  of  X  or  of  not-X  is  of  no  significance,  for  this  will 
depend  upon  the  arbitrary  assignment  of  our  symbols  in  the 
stating  of  our  premises. 

This  limitation  of  our  universe,  tacit  or  avowed,  may 
take  a  variety  of  forms.  In  this  respect  Boole's  view  has, 
I  think,  been  misunderstood  by  some  writers  (as  by  Mr 
Macfarlane)1.  He  seems  to  think  that  Boole  just  drew,  as  it 
were,  a  definite  outline  to  mark  the  limits,  and  then  con- 
sidered himself  bound  to  take  every  kind  of  logical  entity  to 
be  found  within  those  bounds.  I  cannot  perceive  that  that 
was  his  view,  and  certainly  I  should  reject  any  such  interpre- 
tation niyself.  The  limits  of  application  of  our  formulae 
seem  to  me  in  every  respect  open  to  our  own  choice.  They 
may  take  the  form  of  any  order  or  plane  of  existences,  as 
well  as  that  of  any  boundary  line  on  such  a  plane.  For 
instance,  we  are  applying,  say,  the  terms  European  and  not- 
European.  We  may  extend  our  universe  so  as  to  embrace 

1  "It   appears  that  what  Boole  all  the  entities  which  are  or  can  be 

means  by  the  universe  of  discourse  is  imagined  to  be  in  it,  whether  mental 

not  the  objects  denoted  by  a  Univer-  or  physical,  ponderable  or  imponder- 

sal  Substantive,  but  a  definite  part  of  able,   atomic  or  complex"  (Algebra 

the  whole  realm  of  things, — a  limited  of  Logic,  p.  6). 
portion  of  the  physical  universe,  with 


186  The  universe  of  discourse.  [CHAP. 

the  sum-total  of  logical  existence,  in  which  case  European 
includes  things  other  than  men,  and  not-European  includes 
the  unlimited  myriads  of  entities  which  people  that  hetero- 
geneous domain.  Or  we  may  restrict  it  to  man,  in  which  case 
not-European  is  limited  to  men  of  other  quarters  of  the 
world.  Or  it  is  equally  open  to  us,  in  the  case  of  any  special 
example,  to  confine  it  to  the  British  House  of  Commons,  in 
which  case  European  is  limited  to  some  650  persons,  and  not- 
European  is  non-existent.  That  is,  in  this  last  case,  European 
is  logically  'all',  and  not-European  is  'nothing'. 

'All'  and  'nothing'  therefore,  in  any  application  of  our 
formulae,  are  to  be  interpreted  in  accordance  with  the  limits 
which  we  may  decide  to  lay  down  at  the  outset  of  the 
particular  logical  processes  in  question.  The  all  of  some 
reference  may,  as  it  happens,  be  absolutely  all,  in  the  sense 
that  the  widest  extension  of  our  universe  would  not  yield  any 
more  of  it.  Thus  no  extension  of  the  universe  beyond  man, 
would  yield  any  other  specimens  of  'rational  animal'  than 
those  which  are  human.  And  the  nothing  of  some  reference 
may  merely  mean  nothing  there,  whereas  the  term  may 
apply  to  any  number  elsewhere,  possibly  to  'all'  else  that 
exists.  All  applications  of  our  logic  are,  as  remarked,  at  our 
free  choice ;  we  might  limit  our  application  of  the  terms 
'good'  and  'not-good'  to  the  London  cabs  with  odd  numbers, 
and  every  logical  rule  will  hold  valid  as  well  as  if  we  had 
selected  a  less  absurd  sort  of  universe. 

It  has  been  said  above  that  this  question  of  the  Universe 
only  arises  when  we  apply  our  formulas.  Now  diagrams  are 
strictly  speaking  a  form  of  application,  and  therefore  such 
considerations  at  once  meet  us  when  we  come  to  make  use 
of  diagrams.  I  draw  a  circle  to  represent  X\  then  what 
is  outside  of  that  circle  represents  Jiot-X,  but  the  limits  of 
that  outside  are  whatever  I  choose  to  consider  them.  They 


viii.]  The  universe  of  discourse.  187 

may  cover  the  whole  sheet  of  paper,  or  they  may  be  con- 
tracted definitely  by  drawing  another  circle  to  stand  as  the 
limit  of  the  universe;  or,  better  still,  we  may  merely  say 
vaguely  that  the  limits  of  the  universe  are  somewhere  out- 
side the  figure  but  that  there  is  not  the  slightest  ground  of 
principle  or  convenience  to  induce  us  to  indicate  them. 

The  settlement  of  the  Universe  being  therefore  a  question 
of  application  merely  it  can  never  be  indicated  by  our 
symbols,  for  these  must  in  themselves  be  perfectly  general. 
They  know  nothing  of  any  kind  of  limit  except  what  is 
purely  formal.  When  it  is  asked,  What  are  the  limits  of 
not-rc  ?  the  symbolic  answer  is  invariably  the  same,  'all  that 
is  excluded  from  x  is  taken  up  by  not-a;'.  It  is  only  when 
we  go  on  to  enquire  what  is  meant  by  'all'  that  the  question 
of  a  limit  comes  in,  and  this  is  a  practical  matter  involving 
the  interpretation  of  our  data.  Hence,  for  instance,  we  ought 
not  to  say  that  in  the  expression  zx  =  zy,  we  necessarily  mean 
that  "in  the  universe  z,  all  x  is  the  same  as  all  y".  That  we 
may  make  z  our  universe  in  this  case,  as  in  any  other,  is 
indisputable,  and,  if  we  do  so,  then  the  above  is  the  true 
explanation  of  the  statement;  but  there  is  nothing  in  the 
statement  to  compel  us  to  make  it  there,  or  to  do  more  than 
suggest  to  us  to  do  so.  On  the  contrary,  the  employment  of 
any  symbol  z  immediately  intimates  not-3,  and  unless  we  are 
told  (on  material  grounds),  or  decide  for  ourselves  arbitrarily, 
that  there  shall  be  no  noi-z,  we  should  naturally  infer  that 
the  universe  will  find  place  for  something  of  that  sort.  The 
statement  zx  =  zy  would,  on  a  diagram,  be  thus  repre- 
sented ; — 


188  The  universe  of  discourse.  [CHAP. 

(for  we  must  simply  regard  'zx  which  is  not  t/'  and  lzy 
which  is  not  x',  as  being  abolished).  It  is  clear  that  within 
the  universe  of  z,  x  and  y  coincide;  but  then  so  they  may 
also  to  some  extent  outside  it,  to  say  nothing  of  there  being 
also  a  place  provided  outside  for  what  is  x  alone,  and  y  alone, 
and  neither  of  the  two.  Similarly  we  can  see  that  within 
the  universe  x,  z  is  but  a  portion  of  y ;  and  that  within  the 
universe  y,  z  is  but  a  portion  of  x  \ 

I  cannot  therefore  agree  with  Mr  Macfarlane  (Algebra  of 
Logic,  p.  29)  that  "Every  general  proposition  refers  to  a 
definite  universe,  which  is  the  subject  of  the  judgment... 
For  example,  'All  men  are  mortal'  refers  to  the  universe 
'men'.  'No  men  are  perfect',  refers  to  the  same  universe". 
I  prefer  to  say  that  there  is  no  indication  here  of  what  the 
universe  may  be ;  this  being  a  matter  of  private  interpreta- 
tion or  application,  in  no  way  suggested  by  our  symbols. 
Moreover,  on  the  symbolic  system  it  is  universally  admitted 
that  the  distinction  between  subject  and  predicate  is  lost : 
why  then  are  we  to  consider  that  'no  x  is  y'  has  x  as  its 
universe  rather  than  y  ? 

The  outside  of  our  Universe  itself  is  of  course  simply 
disregarded.  It  must  not  only  not  exist  in  the  sense  of  being 
affected  by  negative  attributes  only,  but  in  that  of  having  no 
attributes  whatever,  positive  or  negative.  It  contains  no 
compartments  even,  which  we  can  speak  of  as  either  empty 
or  occupied.  We  simply  do  not  suffer  our  minds  to  dwell 
upon  it.  The  outside  of  any  particular  universe  may  in  fact 
be  considered  to  stand  in  much  the  same  relation  to  all 

1  This  may  be  exhibited  symboli-  changes  we  have  interfered  with  the 

cally  thus: — Put  *  =  1,   then  x=y.  statement  as  originally  given  to  us. 

That  i»,  when  z  is  made  'all',  x  and  y  That  statement  in  no  way  called  for 

are  co-extensive.   Similarly  put  x  =  l,  these    restrictions,    though    it    lays 

and  we  have  z  =  zy,  or  'All  z  is  y\  itself  open  to  them. 
It  is  clear  that  in   making   theso 


VIII.] 


The  universe  of  discourse. 


189 


possible  logical  predication  that  the  field  of  'view'  at^he  back 
of  our  heads  stands  to  all  possible  colours. 

The  fact  that  we  thus  regard  the  real  extent  of  that  sum 
total  of  things  which  makes  up  our  Universe  as  a  matter  of 
application,  rather  than  as  anything  which  can  be  considered 
formal,  is  another  reason  for  representing  it  by  unity1.  This 
fitly  indicates  its  perfectly  general  character.  The  standard 
expression  xy  +  xy  +  Hey  +  xy  =  1  declares  that  the  four  classes 
on  the  left  make  up  'all'.  If  any  one  presses  for  further 
information  as  to  what  this  'all'  may  be,  we  reply  that  this 
is  a  part  of  the  data  and  therefore  to  be  postulated  by  the 
logician,  as  given  to  him,  not  a  formal  principle  to  be 
supplied  by  him. 


1  The  main  grounds  for  choosing 
unity  for  this  purpose  were  given  in 
Chap.' ii.  They  were  connected  with 
the  particular  processes  of  '  multipli- 
plication '  and  '  addition '  adopted  in 
our  logical  system.  Some  writers, 
who  do  not  accept  these  processes 
exactly  as  we  do,  have  employed  other 
symbols  instead.  For  instance  E. 
Grassmann  (Begriffslehre)  makes  use 
of  the  letter  T.  Adopting  as  he  does 
the  non-exclusive  plan  of  expressing 
alternatives  (some  further  account  of 
this  plan  is  given  in  Chap,  xix.)  he 
writes  a+T=T,  in  order  to  express 
the  fact  that  the  universe,  since  it 
includes  a,  cannot  be  increased  by 


any  addition  of  a  to  it.  If  we  are  to 
admit  such  a  formula  at  all,  I  cer- 
tainly think  that  less  violence  is  done 
to  acquired  associations  by  writing 
a  +  T—T  than  by  writing  a +  1  =  1. 
The  companion  formula  however, 
axT=a,  is  less  convenient  than 
a  x  1  =  a.  Those  who  adopt  the 
symbol  oo  for  the  Universe  (Wundt, 
Logik,  p.  233,  Prof.  C.  S.  Peirce, 
Am.  Ac.  of  Arts  and  Sciences,  1870  ; 
Am.  Journal  of  Mathematics,  Vol. 
m.),  have  in  consistency,  on  the  same 
non-exclusive  scheme,  to  face  the 
results  ax  00  =  a,  a  +  oo  =  oo.  Prof. 
Pierce  in  fact  does  not  shrink  from 
their  employment  in  this  way. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

ON  DEVELOPMENT  OR  EXPANSION. 

THE  process  called  sometimes  Development,  and  sometimes 
Expansion,  is  the  most  fundamental  and  important  with 
which  we  shall  have  to  concern  ourselves.  In  fact  when 
the  nature  and  results  of  this  process  are  fully  under- 
stood the  main  task  of  Symbolic  Logic  is  grasped.  Both 
of  these  terms  (Development  and  Expansion1)  possess  some 
symbolic  propriety,  as  will  be  seen  when  we  come  to  give 
rules  for  the  performance  of  the  operation  in  question ;  but 
on  merely  logical  grounds  such  an  expression  as  '  continued 
dichotomization',  or  '  subdivision ',  would  seem  to  be  more 
appropriate. 

Every  one  who  has  read  a  treatise  on  Logic  is  familiar 
with  the  fact  that  any  assignable  class  admits  of  dichotomy, 

1  The  objection  to  these  two  nation  of  these  elements  into  a 
terms  is  that  they  do  not  readily  single  group,  are  inverse  operations 
offer  any  appropriate  correlatives;  to  one  another.  'Subdivision'  and 
whereas  when  we  regard  the  opera-  'Aggregation',  though  not  without 
tions  themselves,  we  see  that  the  objection,  seem  to  satisfy  this  Condi- 
splitting  up  of  a  class  into  its  nlti-  tion  of  standing  as  convenient  cor- 
mate  elements,  and  the  rccoinbi-  relatives. 


CHAP,  ix.]          On  development  or  expansion.  191 

or  division  into  two  parts,  x  and  not-#  respectively,  whatever 
quality  x  may  stand  for.  One  or  other  of  these  two*  parts 
may  of  course  fail  to  be  actually  represented,  but  both 
cannot  thus  fail ;  in  other  words,  these  may  be  regarded, 
as  already  remarked,  as  compartments  into  one  or  other 
of  which  every  individual  must  fall,  and  into  one  or  both 
of  which  every  class  must  be  distributable.  At  this  point 
common  Logic  mostly  stops  in  practice.  It  is  clear  however 
that  we  have  thus  made  but  a  single  step  along  a  path 
where  indefinite  progress  is  possible.  Each  of  the  classes  or 
compartments  thus  produced  equally  admits  of  subdivision 
in  respect  of  y,  whatever  y  may  be ;  and  so  on  without 
limit.  The  subdivision  in  respect  of  one  class  term  (x)  gives 
two  classes,  x  and  not-#;  that  in  respect  of  two  terms 
gives  four  classes ;  with  three  we  obtain  eight,  and  so  on. 
Stating  the  results  with  full  generality,  we  see  that  with 
n  terms  thus  to  combine  and  subdivide  we  have  a  complete 
list  of  2"  ultimate  classes. 

This  dichotomous  scheme  is  of  course  absolutely  complete 
so  far  as  it  extends.  It  contains  the  provision  or  the  raw 
materials  for  the  statement  of  every  purely  logical  propo- 
sition which  can  possibly  be  framed  by  employment  of  the 
terms  in  question.  It  may  therefore  be  regarded  as  a  sort  of 
framework  for  all  possible  propositions  involved  in,  or  ex- 
pressible by,  the  given  terms.  If,  for  instance,  we  have 
two  terms  x  and  y,  then  the  four  sub-classes  indicated  by 
xy,  xy,  xy,  and  xy,  comprise  all  the  elements  which  can 
possibly  be  needed  or  employed  for  the  purpose  of  con- 
structing propositions  out  of  the  terms  x  and  y.  This  was 
explained  in  a  preceding  chapter  where  we  drew  up,  on  this 
suggestion,  a  scheme  of  elementary  forms  of  propositions. 
To  these  we  might  have  added  many  more  by  combining  the 
elements  two  and  two,  or  three  and  three  together. 


192  On  development  or  expansion.  [CHAP. 

Of  course  this  dichotomous  subdivision  of  terms  is  not 
Logic,"  but  rather  a  substructure  of  logic.  It  is  an  orderly 
process  for  assigning  all  the  elements  which  we  can  need 
in  our  reasonings,  and  the  performance  of  it  is  therefore 
rather  a  preliminary  to  reasoning  than  reasoning  itself.  It 
is  however  an  absolutely  necessary  preliminary  when  we  are 
going  to  occupy  ourselves  with  complicated  propositions 
or  groups  of  propositions,  and  we  shall  accordingly  proceed  to 
discuss  it. 

The  process  of  subdivision  thus  indicated  is,  as  a  rule, 
easy  enough  to  carry  out  by  mere  inspection,  unless  we  are 
concerned  with  complicated  class  expressions.  Suppose  for 
instance,  to  begin  with  a  very  simple  example,  that  we  had 
the  class  group  xy  +  xz  to  deal  with  in  this  way.  It  is 
clear  at  once  that  the  term  xy  admits  of  no  further  sub- 
division of  this  kind,  as  regards  either  x  or  y\  for  it  is 
xy  most  unmistakeably,  and  can  therefore  yield  no  term  of 
the  not-#  or  not-y  description.  Accordingly  the  only  sub- 
division open  to  it  is  in  respect  of  z,  so  we  divide  it  into 
the  parts  which  are,  and  which  are  not  z,  viz.  into  xyz, 
and  xyz.  Similarly  xz  admits  only  of  subdivision  in  respect 
of  y,  and  yields  the  terms  xyz  and  xyz.  And  here  of  course 
the  process  stops,  for  we  are  only  supposed  to  have  the  three 
terms  x,  y,  and  z,  before  us.  Indeed  they  are  the  only  terms 
entering  into  the  given  expression.  Accordingly  the  result 
of  the  process  is  given  by  xyz  +  xyz  +  xyz  +  xyz. 

So  much  of  what  has  to  be  said  on  the  subject  of  this 
Development  has  already  been  anticipated  in  previous  chap- 
ters, that  it  really  does  not  seem  that  much  more  expla- 
nation is  called  for  at  present.  We  shall  consider  it  almost 
at  once  indeed,  in  its  wider  symbolic  aspect,  when  it  assumes 
a  form  which  is  very  far  from  being  familiar  and  obvious ; 
but  just  at  present  I  prefer  to  look  at  it  in  the  light  of 


ix.]  On  development  or  expansion. 

ordinary  logical  considerations.  Such  simple  remarks  as 
remain  to  be  said  under  this  head  may  be  gathered  up 
as  follows : — 

I.  It  will  be  observed  that  in  the  above  example  we 
only  developed  the  expression  xy  +  xz  in  respect  of  the  class 
terms  actually  involved  in  it,  viz.  x,  y,  and  z.  There  was 
however  no  necessity  for  thus  confining  ourselves;  every 
subdivision  which  we  reached  might  have  been  still  further 
subdivided,  if  we  wished,  in  respect  of  a,  &,  c,  or  any  other 
succession  of  letters  regarded  as  representing  class  terms. 
The  reasons  for  not  doing  this  are  however  obvious.  Nothing 
is,  or  could  be,  gained  in  this  way.  Any  degree  of  sub- 
division is  useful  which  turns  upon  class  terms  about  which 
definite  suggestions  are  given  to  us,  that  is,  which  enter 
into  the  data  of  the  problem  before  us.  But  to  go  on 
subdividing  beyond  this  point,  by  introducing  terms  about 
which  no  suggestions  are  given  to  us,  can  be  nothing  but  an 
idle  exercise  of  our  rules  of  operation. 

Of  course  each  component  element  of  the  expression  which 
is  given  to  us  to  develop  will  be  treated  in  respect  of  terms 
which  it  does  not  contain  ;  otherwise  indeed  there  could 
be  no  development.  Thus  xy  did  not  involve  z,  nor  did 
xz  involve  y.  The  rule  is  that  every  element  must  be 
developed  in  respect  of  every  term  which  we  may  have  to 
take  into  account,  that  is,  which  the  whole  expression  before 
us  involves.  Hence  follows  one  very  important  conside- 
ration. We  shall  often  find  unity  entering  amongst  our 
symbols;  and  this,  being  a  class  term,  must  admit  of  de- 
velopment like  any  other.  No  term  visibly  occurs  in  it,  but 
representing  as  it  does  the  sum-total  of  all  things,  all  con- 
ceivable classes  must  be  contained  in  it.  Hence  unity  must 
be  developed,  in  any  given  case,  in  respect  of  all  the  class 
terms  involved  in  the  expression  in  which  it  occurs.  Take 
V.  L.  13 


194  On  development  or  expansion.  [CHAP. 

for  instance,  1  —  xy  —  xy.  Here  two  terms  (x  and  y)  occur 
in  combination.  When  we  develop  1  in  respect  of  these  two, 
we  obtain  xy  +  xy  +  xy  +  xy.  The  other  two  terms  in  the  given 
expression  are  already  in  their  ultimate  state  of  subdivision. 
Hence  the  whole  expression  when  developed  resolves  itself 
into  xy  +  xy.  As  it  happens  here,  this  is  actually  a  simpler 
and  shorter  result  than  it  was  before  development.  As 
a  rule  the  reverse  is  the  case,  this  process  of  subdivision 
generally  multiplying  the  number  of  final  terms ;  to  such  an 
extent  indeed  when  the  terms  are  numerous  as  to  make  the 
statement  of  the  result  very  tedious  and  complicated. 

II.  Every  class  other  than  unity,  howsoever  composed, 
must  be  logically  less  than  unity.     This  follows  from  the 
very  meaning  of  our  symbols ;  for  1  stands  for  '  all  things', 
and  x  stands  for  a  limited  selection  from  all,  viz.  for  such 
of  them  as  are  x.    Hence  no  class  term,  or  group   which 
can  constitute  a  class,  will  contain  all  the  elements  which 
have  to  be  referred  to  in  the  process  of  developing  it.     Some 
will   contain   more   of  these  ultimate  elements,  others  will 
contain  less,  but  the  development  of  unity  alone  can  contain 
them  all.     Some  indeed  may  already  happen  to   be  given 
in  their  lowest  terms  and  so  admit  of  no  further  develop- 
ment.    Thus  if  we  took  xyz  and  developed  it  with  respect  to 
the   three   symbols   which    it   contains,    we   should   merely 
get  the  same  result  over  again,   every  other  combination 
vanishing  from  the  development.   The  example  above,  viz. 
xy  +  xzt  developed  into  four  ultimate  subdivisions  only,  the 
other  four  not  appearing  in  the  final  result. 

III.  If  the  original  class  group  which  was  given  to  us 
to  be  developed  contain  none  but  mutually  exclusive  terms, 
no  element  in  the  development  will  appear  more  than  once 
in  our  result.     But   if  the  original   statement  was  faulty 
in   this  respect  the  fault  will   appear  immediately  in  the 


IX.]  On  development  or  expansion.  195 

development,  by  one  or  more  of  their  elements  having  some 
other  factor  than  unity ; — 2,  3,  or  so  on.  Take  for  instance 
x  +  y  and  develop  it ;  it  will  yield  the  result  xy  +  xy  +  %xy. 
This  of  course  is  nothing  but  the  question  of  overlapping 
classes,  and  the  proper  form  of  expression  of  an  alternative, 
discussed  in  Chap.  II.  The  process  of  development  is  in 
fact  the  suitable  mode  of  testing  whether  or  not  any  given 
expression,  constituting  a  group  of  classes,  is  correctly  and 
accurately  drawn  up  in  this  respect.  So  simple  and  obvious 
a  redundancy  as  that  in  x  +  y  can  be  detected  at  a  glance, 
but  one  in  which  the  overlapping  part  is  very  special  and 
limited  could  hardly  be  discovered  without  this  methodical 
process  of  subdivision  into  all  the  ultimate  elements.  Thus 
1  —  x  +  yz  +  xyz  yields,  after  development,  the  term  Zxyz 
indicating  that  as  it  thus  stood  the  element  representing 
'  things  that  are  y  and  z  but  not  x'  is  counted  twice  over. 
It  must  therefore  be  regarded  as  an  instance  of  faulty  ex- 
pression. Had  it  stood,  instead,  1  —  x  +  xyz  +  xyz,  no  fault 
could  have  been  found  with  it  in  this  respect,  as  all  the  class 
terms  would  have  been  mutually  exclusive.  (We  here  take 
1  —  x  as  a  simple  class  term.) 

Up  to  this  point  in  our  investigation  of  the  process 
of  Development,  we  have  resorted  to  no  other  considerations 
than  such  as  are  suggested  by  ordinary  Logic,  and  are 
perfectly  explicable  within  its  province1.  Since  everything 
must  be  either  x  or  not-#  it  stood  to  reason  that  every  class 
which  did  not  expressly  by  its  form  belong  to  one  or  other  of 
these  two  divisions  alone,  must  be  capable  of  being  split  up 
into  two  parts  one  of  which  belongs  to  each.  And  this 

1  It  deserves  notice  that  Lambert  Merkmale  des  6  durch  b\a ;    so  hat 

had  got  as  far  as  this  in  Logic:  e.g.  man  a\b  +  b\a  +  ab  +  ab  —  a  +  b' 

"  Man  driicke  die  eigene  Merkmale  (Log.  Abhandlungen,  i.  11). 
des  a  durch  a\b  aus,  und  die  eigene 

13—2 


196  On  development  or  expansion.  [CHAP. 

process,  once  commenced  with  some  one  class  term  as  the 
dividing  element,  could  be  continued  with  another,  and  so  on 
indefinitely,  or  until  all  the  class  terms  assigned  in  the 
data  were  exhausted. 

What  we  now  propose  to  do  is  not  to  trust  to  mere 
acuteness  to  carry  out  this  process,  but  to  ascertain  whether 
we  cannot  give  a  perfectly  general  symbolic  rule  of  operation 
for  effecting  it.  This  was  one  of  the  grand  steps  of  generali- 
zation introduced  by  Boole.  Take  then  for  examination 
a  group  of  class  terms  a  trifle  less  simple  than  those  given 
above,  for  example  x  +  y  +  xyz,  and  suppose  we  develop  this 
with  respect  to  x.  The  first  and  third  of  these  terms  remain 
unchanged,  for  since  they  involve  x  they  cannot  yield  any 
not-a;  part.  The  second  term  splits  up  into  xy  and  xy.  The 
whole  expression  thus  becomes  x  +  y  (x  +  x)  +  xyz.  Now 
the  rule  of  formation  is  readily  seen  in  this  case,  and  it 
is  one  which  will  equally  apply  to  all  other  cases.  It  is  this. 
Every  term  in  the  given  expression  which  involves  either 
x  or  x  is  left  as  it  stands,  and  every  term  which  does  not 
involve  x  is  multiplied  by  the  factors  x  and  x,  i.e.  is  sub- 
divided into  these  two  parts ;  these  being  then  added  to- 
gether to  form  the  result.  Of  course,  in  a  sense,  all  the 
terms  are  left  unaltered  in  value  ;  for  subdivision,  when 
all  the  elements  are  retained,  leaves  the  aggregate  undis- 
turbed. But  then  to  resolve  the  total  class  into  its  elemen- 
tary parts  and  to  retain  all  these  parts  before  us,  is  just 
the  very  process  which  we  are  proposing  to  carry  out. 

As  thus  deduced,  the  Development  took  the  form 
x  +  y  (x  +  x) +  xyz.  Now  this  may  be  differently  arranged, 
if  we  pick  out  separately  and  group  together  the  x  and  not-a; 
parts,  for  it  then  becomes 

(1  +  y  +  yz)  x  +  yx. 
When  put  into  this  form   we   see   that  the  following  rule 


ix.]  On  development  or  expansion.  197 

of  operation  for  obtaining  the  development  may  be  laid  down. 
'  Write  1  for  x  all  through  the  given  expression,  and  multi- 
ply the  result  so  obtained  by  x  :  then  write  0  for  oc  all  through 
it,  and  multiply  this  result  by  x.  The  sum  of  these  two 
results  is  the  full  development  of  the  given  expression 
with  respect  to  #.' 

This  rule  of  operation  lends  itself  to  an  extremely  brief 
and  simple  symbolic  expression,  for  the  whole  of  it  is  con- 
veyed at  once  by  the  statement,  'the  development  of  f(x)  is 
f(l)  x  +/(0)  x\  This  is  the  rule  given  by  Boole  almost  at  the 
commencement  of  his  work,  and  which  plays  so  large  a  part 
in  his  method  *.  As  regards  the  true  logical  interpretation  of 
it  we  shall  have  more  to  say  hereafter,  but  at  present  I 
will  merely  give  a  word  or  two  of  explanation  of  its  symbolic 
construction  as  it  thus  stands.  It  need  not  be  added,  after 
what  has  been  already  said,  that  f(x)  is  to  be  regarded 
as  being  merely  a  perfectly  general  symbol  for  any  class, 
or  group  or  arrangement  of  classes,  which  involves  x  in  it. 
The  symbol /(I)  stands,  as  usually  in  mathematics,  for  this 
same  class  group  when  it  is  altered  by  changing  every  x 
in  it  into  1,  and  leaving  every  other  letter  unaltered ;  whilst 
/(O)  stands  for  the  same  class  group  when  x  is  changed 
into  0  and  no  other  change  made.  Hence  the  expression 
/(l)a;+/(0)^  must  be  regarded  as  being  merely  a  symbolic 
representation  of  the  rule  of  operation  given  above. 

In  the  above  investigation  we  were  only  supposed  to 
subdivide  the  given  class  expression  in  respect  of  one  of  the 
terms  involved  in  it,  viz.  x.  It  is  equally  open  to  us  however 
to  proceed  further  in  the  same  course  of  subdivision.  Pre- 

1  Boole  gave  only  formal  proofs  f(x)=f(i)  x+f(Q)x.  He  then  applies 

of  this  rule.    Thus,  assume  /  (x)  =  ax  it   at  once   to  the   development  of 

+  bx.  Putting  x =1  and  0  respectively,  a   fractional   expression.     (Laws  of 

we  have  a  =/  (1),  b  =  f  (0) ;   Hence  Thought,  p.  72.) 


198  On  development  or  expansion.  [CHAP. 

sumably  the  given  expression  was  built  up  of  a  number  of 
class  terms  aggregated  together,  such  as  x,  y,  z,  &c. ;  of  which 
terms  we  have  only  taken  one  into  account.  Now  it  must  be 
remembered  that  the  result  of  this  first  operation  will  be 
of  precisely  the  same  general  character  as  the  original  expres- 
sion with  which  we  started.  We  were  supposed  to  start 
with  a  class  expression,  indicated  by/(#) ;  and  we  get  from  it 
another  class  expression  ;  indicated  by  /(I)  #+/(0)  x.  The 
only  difference  between  them  is  that  the  latter  is  more 
subdivided  than  the  former,  having  been  broken  up  in 
respect  of  one  of  its  component  elements,  viz.  x. 

Whatever  therefore  we  did  to  the  former  expression  we 
may  repeat  in  a  similar  way  upon  the  latter.  We  cannot  of 
course  develop  the  latter  again  in  respect  of  x,  for  that 
has  been  already  done.  We  may  apply  the  rule  to  it  indeed 
if  we  like,  but  it  will  leave  us  exactly  where  it  found  us, 
for  we  shall  merely  have  the  same  result  repeated  unchanged, 
and  so  on  as  often  as  we  chose  to  continue  the  process.  But 
if  we  treat  it  the  second  time  in  respect  of  some  other 
class  term  involved  in  it,  say  for  instance  y,  then  we  shall  be 
really  carrying  out  the  process  of  subdivision  one  stage  more. 
We  suppose  then  that  /(I)  x  +/(0)  x  involves  y ;  that  is 
to  say,  that  the  class  symbol  y,  amongst  others,  enters  into 
/(I)  and  /(O)  as  it  did  into  f(x),  for  it  must  be  remembered 
that  it  was  only  x  which  was  meddled  with  by  being  turned 
into  1  and  0  respectively,  the  other  class  symbols  being  left 
untouched. 

We  want  then  to  develop  /(I)  x  +/(0)  x  in  respect  of  y. 
We  might  proceed  by  the  process  which  we  first  started  with, 
but  it  will  be  simpler  to  adopt  at  once  the  symbolic  process 
which  was  seen  to  yield  the  same  result.  The  rule  which  it 
gave  was  to  write  1  for  y  all  through  and  multiply  by  y,  and 
then  write  0  for  y  all  through  and  multiply  by  y,  and  add  these 


ix.]  On  development  or  expansion.  199 

together.  This  rule  applied  to  /(I)  gives  us  /(I,  \}y  +/(!,  0)i/; 
where  /(I,  1)  stands  for  what/(#)  becomes  when  y  as  well  as 
x  is  put  equal  to  1,  and  /(I,  0)  stands  for  what/(#)  becomes 
when  x  is  put  =  1,  and  y  =  0.  Similarly  /(O)  develops  into 
/(0,  1)  y  +/(0,  0)  2/,  where  /(0,  1)  is  f(ac)  with  x  =  0,  and  y  =  1, 
and  /(O,  0)  is  the  same  expression  with  both  x  and  y  =  0. 
Hence  the  whole  result  thus  obtained  is 


Of  course  we  need  not  stop  here.  If  there  was  a  third 
class  term  z  in  the  original  expression,  this  must  appear 
in  one  or  more  of  the  factors  /(I,  1),  f(l>  0),  &c.  Hence 
the  process  of  development  or  subdivision  may  be  repeated  a 
third  time,  yielding  8  possible  ultimate  elements  ;  and  so  on 
again  and  again,  until  we  have  taken  every  class  term 
or  symbolic  letter  in  the  original  expression  into  account. 

In  this  expression,  as  will  be  more  fully  pointed  out  pre- 
sently, the  factors  /(I,  !),/(!,  0),  &c.  are  not  logical  class 
terms  involving  x,  y,  &c.,  at  least  not  when  the  Development 
is  fully  completed  ;  for  by  that  time  every  x  and  y  has  been 
changed  into  1  or  0,  and  has  accordingly  disappeared  from  the 
result.  Hence  these  expressions  are,  symbolically,  purely 
numerical  quantities  ;  whilst  logically,  they  are,  as  will  be 
shown,  directions  to  take  into  account  the  whole,  an  uncertain 
part,  or  none,  of  the  class  to  which  they  are  prefixed  as 
factors.  Thus,  in  this  case,  xy  denotes  a  class;  /(I,  1)  tells 
us  whether  or  not  that  class  is  to  be  included;  and  so  on 
all  through. 

It  need  not  be  remarked  that  the  process  is  a  tedious  one, 
owing  to  the  multitude  of  terms  involved,  but  except  in  this 
respect  it  is  as  simple  and  easy  as  anything  well  can  be. 
Tedious  as  it  is  however,  it,  or  some  equivalent  of  it,  is 
unfortunately  inevitable,  granted  the  desirability  of  the  end 
aimed  at.  That  is  to  say,  if  we  really  want  to  determine  all 


200  On  development  or  expansion.  [CHAP. 

the  mutual  relations  of  four  terms  and  their  contradictories, — 
and  many  problems  may  demand  this, — then  we  have  no 
other  course  but  to  examine  in  detail  all  the  2*  or  16  ultimate 
subdivisions  thus  produced.  Hence  if  problems  of  this  kind 
had  more  than  a  speculative  interest  (which  they  can  very 
seldom  have)  any  mechanical  means  for  aiding  us  in  this 
process  would  be  most  valuable.  Some  account  of  such 
machines  was  given  in  the  fifth  chapter. 

The  point  therefore  at  which  we  have  at  present  arrived 
is  this.  By  perfectly  simple  and  intelligible  logical  steps  we 
can  break  up  a  composite  class  into  all  the  elementary  classes 
of  which  it  consists ;  and  we  can  show  that  identically 
the  same  result  can  be  obtained  by  the  symbolic  rule  of 
operation,  'for  f(x)  write/(l)#+/(0)  x'. 

We  must  now  look  about  to  see  under  what  sort  of 
restrictions  such  a  rule  as  this  is  obtained,  and  whether  any  of 
these  restrictions  are  removable. 

I.  To  begin  with ;  is  it  necessary  that  the  class  group 
which  we  thus  develop  should  be  stated  in  its  rigidly  accurate 
form  in  which  it  consists  solely  of  an  aggregate  of  mutually 
exclusive  terms  ?  By  no  means ;  in  fact  one  use  of  Develop- 
ment is  to  detect  whether  or  not  the  component  elements  do 
thus  overlap  one  another.  Treat  x  +  y  in  this  way  and 
it  becomes  2xy  +  xy  +  xy,  thus  reminding  us  that  the  com- 
mon part  is  xy.  There  are  indeed  objections  both  of  principle 
and  of  method,  to  suffering  any  class  terms  which  are  not 
mutually  exclusive  to  enter  into  our  logical  statements, 
but  these  objections  do  not  in  the  slightest  way  affect 
the  validity  of  this  process  of  Development. 

This  will  indeed  be  obvious  if  we  remember  that  Develop- 
ment is  nothing  but  subdivision  into  its  ultimate  class 
elements,  and  that  all  that  is  meant  by  insisting  on  mutual 
exclusiveness  is  the  avoidance  of  the  double  counting  of  the 


ix.}  On  development  or  expansion,  201 

overlapping  part;  this  being  so,  every  doubly  counted  ele- 
ment in  the  development  must  necessarily  stand  out  in  relief 
from  amongst  the  others  by  being  multiplied  by  the  factor 
2.  Similarly  if  it  is  counted  thrice  over.  Thus  develop 
xy  +  xz  +  yz  and  we  have  xyz  +  ocyz  +  xyz  +  Sxyz,  thus 
reminding  us  that  each  of  these  three  terms  involves  one 
part  peculiar  to  itself,  and  one  (xyz)  common  to  all  three. 

There  is  however  a  far  more  important  extension  than 
this  to  be  considered  in  the  application  of  our  formula.  Have 
we  a  right  to  apply  it  to  uninterpretable  expressions,  either  at 
first  hand  or  in  the  process  of  passing  through  such  ex- 
pressions in  case  we  are  led  to  them  ?  There  is  no  doubt  that 
Boole  held  this  opinion  himself,  nor,  I  presume,  that  the 
same  view  has  been  held  by  many,  if  not  most,  of  those  who 
have  accepted  and  used  his  formula.  He  regarded  this  rule 
of  Development,  apparently,  as  a  sort  of  engine  potent 
enough  to  reduce  to  a  series  of  intelligible  logical  terms 
expressions  which  as  given  to  us  had  not  a  vestige  of 
intelligible  meaning  in  them.  He  appeals,  in  justification  of 
this  rather  startling  procedure,  to  the  practice  of  the  mathe- 
maticians ;  especially  to  their  employment  of  the  symbol 
J  —  1,  as  offering  an  analogy  and  justification  for  this  corre- 
sponding step  in  Logic. 

If  we  were  forced  to  adopt  this  view  a  very  difficult 
enquiry  would  have  to  be  entered  on.  We  should  have  to  go 
rather  deeply  into  the  question  as  to  the  nature  of  reasoning, 
and  the  limits  within  which  it  may  be  relied  on, — discussing 
indeed  the  question  whether  and  how  far  the  processes  of  ma- 
thematics do  really  offer  what  can  be  called  uninterpretable 
steps, — an  enquiry  which  I  should  prefer  to  let  altogether 
alone.  Fortunately  however  it  does  not  appear  that  any 
discussion  of  this  kind  is  really  called  for,  at  least  not  on  the 
principles  adopted  in  this  work.  It  is  to  fractional  forms 


202  On  development  or  expansion.  [CHAP. 

rt» 

only,   such   as  -,  that  it  is   ever    proposed    to   apply   our 

«7 

formulae  in  any  supposed  uninterpretable  application  of  this 
kind, — for  it  would  be  a  mere  sportive  misapplication  of 
them  to  think  of  making  them  treat  such  expressions  as  *fx, 
log  x,  and  so  forth, — and  to  fractional  forms  we  have  seen 
that  a  very  easy  logical  explanation  could  be  given. 

The  general  justification  and  explanation  therefore  of  the 
application  of  our  rule  f(x)=f(l)  x+f(0)x  to  expressions 

oc 
of  which  -  is  the  simplest  type,  ought  not   to   offer  any 

•/ 

difficulty.  We  have  already  explained  these  expressions,  in 
detail,  by  purely  logical  considerations,  so  that  all  that 
remains  at  present  is  to  compare  the  results  thus  obtained 
with  those  deducible  from  the  formula  for  Development. 
The  reader  will  remember  that  we  discussed  two  slightly 

sr 
different  ways  of  approaching  the  form  -,  (the  one  being  a 

y 

somewhat  more  direct  and  immediate  way -than  the  other,) 
but  that  in  each  case  alike  that  form  stood  for  a  logical  class. 
It  only  differed  in  fact  from  such  a  form  as  xy,  in  respect  that 
the  desired  class  was  more  remotely  indicated  by  an  operation 
instead  of  being  directly  set  before  us  as  a  result ;  and  that, 
the  operation  by  which  it  was  to  be  procured  being  an 
inverse  one,  it  was  consequently  indefinite  in  some  respects  as 
to  its  limits.  But  none  the  less  was  it  a  logical  class.  On 
my  view  therefore  the  distinction  in  question  is  by  no  means 
one  between  the  interpretable  and  the  uninterpretable,  for 
the  whole  range  of  our  discussion  belongs  to  the  former 
category.  It  is  merely  one  which  may  be  described  sym- 
bolically as  that  between  integral  and  fractional  forms,  and 
logically  as  that  between  direct  and  inverse  processes.  And 
this  distinction,  though  by  no  means  a  profound  one  in 


ix.j  On  development  or  expansion.  203 

principle,  is   sufficiently  important  in  its  results  to  deserve 
separate  consideration  here. 

IT 

We  shall  therefore  apply  our  formula  to  -  with  no  more 

y 

hesitation   than   for  example  to  x  +  xy.     When  we  do  so, 
developing  it  in  accordance  with  the  rule 

/(*>  ^  =/(!>  1)  *y  +/(L  0)  xy  +/(0,  l)xy  +/(0,  0)  xy, 
we  obtain 

0B 


J  ............  (1) 

The  result  obtained  by  purely  logical  considerations  in  the 
third  chapter,  it  will  be  remembered,  was 

AH 

-  =  xy  +  v.  xy,  with  the  attendant  condition  x  =  xy  (2). 

i7 

A  very  little  comparison  will  show  the  complete  identity 
of  these  two  results.  The  first  term  is  the  same  in  each,  for 
|  is  of  course  the  same  as  1,  the  logical  sense  of  which 
has  been  already  settled.  So  is  the  third,  the  only  difference 
being  that  we  had  before  simply  omitted  it  as  not  occurring, 
whereas  here  it  is  expressly  noticed  and  rejected.  The 
fourth  term  again  is  identical  in  each  case,  or  may  fairly  be 
considered  so.  Our  factor  v  stood  for  '  a  perfectly  uncertain 
portion,  some,  all  or  none':  it  was  proposed  in  despair  of 
finding  any  suitable  logical  word  which  should  possess  the 
same  degree  of  indefiniteness,  for  of  course  some,  in  its  recog- 
nized significations,  would  not  answer  our  purpose.  Now 
this  is  exactly  the  well  known  meaning  of  $  in  mathematics, 
which  indicates  perfect  indefiniteness  1.  So  much  is  this  the 
case  that  but  for  the  wish  not  to  excite  prematurely  the  fears 

1  In  each  case  the  indefiniteness  0  to  1  ;  so  that  there  is  this  degree 

extends    over   the    whole    admitted  of  difference  in  the  application  in  the 

range.    In  mathematics  that  range  two  cases. 
extends  from  0  to  oo,  with  us  from 


204 


On  development  or  expansion. 


[CHAP. 


and  prejudices  of  the  timid  we  would  have  appealed  to  it  at 
once  instead  of  using  the  symbol  v,  but  for  the  future 
we  shall  feel  perfectly  at  liberty  to  resort  to  it1.  There  still 
remains  one  terra,  the  second,  which  the  formula  gives  in  the 
peculiar  shape  £  xy.  This  term  we  had  omitted,  though  not 
on  the  ground  on  which  xy  was  omitted, — viz.  that  we  were 

/p 

not  to  include  it  in  - , — but  on  the  ground  that  there  was  no 

such  class.  Which  ever  way  we  express  it,  whether  in  the 
shape  a;  =  xy,  or  xy  =  0,  we  saw  that  the  condition  that  there 
is  no  xy  in  existence  was  necessarily  presupposed  in  the  mere 

tion  as  when  multiplied  by  B  will 


1  It  may  be  remarked  that  there 
is  a  very  curious  anticipation  of  this 
logical  fractional  form  by  H.  Grass- 
mann,  when  he  expresses  the  result 
of  a  generalized  process  of  division  in 

the  form  C+  - ,  C  being  a  particular 

value  of  the  quotient  and  --,  a  term 

which  will  ordinarily  vanish  but 
must  be  admitted  as  a  symbol.  He 
does  not  apply  it  to  Logic,  nor  work 
it  out  in  detail,  but  his  explanation 
is  worth  giving: — 'If  B  .  C=A,  we 

have  the  quotient  in  the  form  —  .  Now 

any  value  which  substituted  for  C 
satisfies  this  equation  may  be  re- 
garded as  a  particular  value  of  this 
quotient.  Every  such  value  -will 
admit  of  being  produced  by  addition 
from  the  value  C,  and  indeed  tho 
portion  to  be  added  to  C  when  multi- 
plied by  B  must  give  zero  if  the 
product  is  to  remain  equal  to  A,  and 
any  such  added  portion  will  leave 
the  product  equal  to  A.  Now  we 
may  represent  generally  such  &  por- 


yield  0,  by  - ;  and  we  may  say  that 

if  C  is  a  particular  value  of  the 
quotient,  and  B  the  divisor,  then  the 
complete  value  of  the  quotient  will 

be    C  +  j- '    ( A  usdehnungslehre,     p. 

213).  I  have  not  quite  grasped  his 
meaning  in  the  rest  of  the  explana- 
nation ;  but  the  fact  that  he'general- 
izes  the  process  indicated  by  division, 
by  admitting  a  surplus  term  (an 
indefinite  one,  observe),  which  will 
vanish  on  'multiplying'  again  by 
the  divisor,  is  clear,  and  this  consti- 
tutes a  striking  analogy  to  the  form 

-=«+-  o.     It  must  be  remembered 

y         0 

that  this  latter  also  might  be  written 

x  +  - ,  since  =  y  is  really  the  same  as 


In  fact,  Grassman  stopped  short 


0 


with-,  whilst  Boole  developed  this 

*    °-  °- 

mto  -  y,  or  its  equivalent  -  xyt 


ix.]  On  development  or  expansion.  205 

A» 

proposal  to  accept  and  interpret  the  expression  -.     Now  the 

t/ 

meaning  of  ^  in  mathematics  is  infinity.  What  then  is 
meant  by  offering  us,  in  a  simple  class  expression,  a  term 
multiplied  by  infinity  ?  Surely  that  there  is  no  such  class  in 
existence,  for  this  is  the  only  way  of  escaping  the  consequent 
absurdity.  On  this  view  then  the  two  expressions  above  given 
agree  in  all  their  details,  as  we  might  expect  that  they 
would  agree. 

In  speaking  thus,  however,  we  must  not  be  understood 
to  be  merely  borrowing  from  mathematics.  It  has  been 
already  shown  (p.  155),  that  §  has  a  strict  logical  signification, 
representing  the  class  of  which  if  we  take  '  no  part '  we 
obtain  '  nothing ',  and  is  therefore  perfectly  indefinite.  Simi- 
larly with  the  other  factorial  expressions  just  introduced. 
Thus  \  stands  for  a  class  such  that  '  all  'of  it  =  all  that  is, 
and  is  therefore  '  all '  itself,  viz.  1.  So  ^  stands  for  the  class 
'all'  of  which  =  0,  and  must  therefore  =  0.  And  £  attempts 
symbolically  to  represent  a  class  such  that  when  we  take  'none' 
of  it  we  yet  obtain  '  all ',  and  thus  represents  an  impossibility. 

It  may  be  remarked  that  the  same  inference  as  to  the 
non-existence  of  the  affected  class  would  have  to  be  drawn  if 
any  other  definite  factor  than  1  or  0  had  presented  itself. 
For  a  class  rightly  expressed,  that  is,  only  once  counted, 
cannot  have  as  one  of  its  constituent  elements  a  portion 
which  is  twice  or  oftener  reckoned.  This  would  really  be  to 
compare  disparate  things,  and  would  be  an  absurdity  equal  to 
assigning  a  length  in  acres.  So,  if  we  met  the  expression 
z  =  x  +  2xy,  where  z  was  a  simple  class  term,  it  would  neces- 
sarily require  that  xy  =  0. 

So  far  then  it  is  clear  that  the  application  of  our  general 

rt« 

symbolic  formula  to  such  expressions  as  -  does^nothing  more 

tJ 


206  On  development  or  expansion.  [CHAP. 

than  could  have  been  secured  by  familiar  logical  conside- 
rations. Why  then  resort  to  it  at  all  ?  For  two  reasons.  In 
the  first  place  though  we  can  get  at  the  full  result  with- 
out it,  it  is  highly  improbable  that  we  should  do  so.  With- 
out a  perfectly  orderly  rule  of  procedure  which  should  direct 
our  attention  to  every  possible  class  in  turn,  and  pronounce 
not  merely  upon  its  inclusion  and  exclusion,  but  also  on 
its  rights  of  existence  under  the  data  assigned,  it  is  hardly 
possible  but  that  some  should  be  omitted.  This,  of  course, 
might  be  secured  by  any  method  even  of  the  most  tentative 
kind  which  took  the  whole  table  of  possible  combinations  of 
the  terms  as  its  guide,  and  insisted  on  considering  them  each 
in  turn  in  relation  to  the  given  premises.  But  there  seems 
to  me  a  far  more  important  reason  than  this  for  advocating 
the  use  of  formulaB  such  as  that  in  question.  As  this  was 
insisted  on  in  the  Introduction,  I  will  merely  call  attention  to 
it  again  in  a  few  words  here.  The  speculative  advantages  to 
be  gained  by  really  comprehensive  logical  theorems  far 
outweigh  any  mechanical  saving  of  trouble  which  they  may 
secure.  To  understand  the  nature  of  an  inverse  operation  as 
such  ;  to  generalize  as  far  as  possible  familiar  processes ; 
to  acquire  an  intelligent  control  of  symbolic  language,  as  dis- 
tinguished from  a  mere  mechanical  facility  in  using  it, — 
which  can  only  be  done  by  constantly  interpreting  its 
results,  especially  in  limiting  cases,  and  checking  them  by 
comparison  with  the  results  of  intuitively  evident  processes, — 
these  and  such  as  these  are  the  great  merits  of  a  proper 
study  of  Symbolic  Logic.  It  is  well  worth  while  to  take 
some  trouble  in  understanding  f(x)  and  the  processes  per- 
formed upon  it,  in  order  to  secure  such  advantages  as 
these. 

We  have  now  given  a  complete   explanation  of  this 
formula  in  its'  application  to  those  fractional  forms  of  which 


ix.]  On  development  or  expansion.  207 

SM 

-  may  be  taken  &$  a  sample;  that  is,  to  forms  in  which  both 

U 

the  numerator  and  the  denominator  are  themselves  intelli- 
gible class  terms  as  they  stand.  But  it  must  be  noticed  that 
we  shall  often  have  to  apply  it,  and  shall  find  it  applied 
successfully,  to  expressions  which  are  not  so  simple  as  this. 

2  ^~  £C 

For  instance,  take  the  expression  —  •=r-  .     The  numerator  of 

M? 

this,  or  z  —  x,  is  not  a  properly  stated  class  term,  for  we 
cannot  take  x  from  z  unless  we  know  that  #  is  a  part  of  z,  and 
no  such  information  is  here  given  to  us.  But  the  formula 
resolves  it  at  once  into  xz  +  %  ocz.  How  is  this  ?  The  reader 
will  very  likely  guess  at  the  solution  for  himself,  especially  if 
he  appeals  to  the  help  of  a  diagram.  But  we  must  defer  the 
explicit  discussion  of  it  until  we  have  entered  more  thoroughly 
into  the  meaning  and  interpretation  of  logical  equations 
in  the  next  two  chapters.  For  the  present  therefore  much  of 
what  we  say  must  be  considered  to  be  limited  to  those  ex- 
pressions in  which  both  numerator  and  denominator  could  be 
interpreted  if  they  stood  alone.  They  probably  form  the  great 
majority  of  the  logical  fractions  we  shall  encounter  in  practice. 
The  reader  will  remember,  in  accordance  with  what  was 
said  in  Chap,  ill.,  that  when  x  and  y  are  each  of  them  strict 
class  expressions  there  is  no  need  to  take  the  trouble  of  analyz- 
ing them  into  all  their  components  elements.  We  may  write 


down  at  once  -^=XY  +  $  XY.    Thus  -—  ^  involving,  as  it 

JL  Z    \   ZW 

does,  four  terms,  would  expand  by  strict  employment  of  the 
formula  into  16  elements.  This  would  be  troublesome  enough, 
and,  what  is  worse,  the  process  of  1  and  0  substitution  is 
so  intricate  that  we  should  be  very  likely  to  make  a  slip 
in  performing  it.  So  it  is  well  to  remember  that  we  may 
write  it  down  at  once  in  the  form 


208  On  development  or  expansion.  [CHAP. 

(x  +  xy)(z  +  zw)  +  %(I—x  —  xy)(l—z-  zw), 
or  (x  +  xy)  (z  +  zw)  +  g  xyzw. 

And  then,  if  we  like,  we  may  expand  this,  which  is  a  far 
simpler  business.  Of  course  we  must  remember  to  add  the  im- 
plied condition  (corresponding  to  XY=  0)  which  here  becomes 

(x  +  xy)  (1  —  z  —  zw)  =  0 
or  (x  +  xy)  zw  =  0,  viz.  xzw  =  0,  xyzw  =  0. 

>y» 

In  the  development  of  -  we  found  that  the  only  numerical 

J 

multipliers  of  the  various  class  elements  which  showed  them- 
selves were  1,  0,  $  and  ^; — each  of  these  being  equivalent  to 
a  representative  of  a  class,  or  a  direction  to  take  or  leave  a 
class.  It  may  be  enquired  here  whether  there  are  any 
other  possible  factors  besides  these,  or  whether  we  have  thus 
got  specimens  of  all  the  possible  factors  ?  For  an  answer  we 
must  look  to  the  process  by  which  these  results  were 
obtained. 

(1)  First  take  the  case  in  which  we  start  with  a  directly 
interpretable  class  group,  say  for  instance  x  +  y  —  xy.  What 
sort  of  numerical  factors  for  our  class  terms  can  we  get  in 
this  case  ?  Our  only  means  of  getting  such  factors,  remember, 
is  by  putting  x  and  y,  each  in  turn,  equal  to  1  and  0  (these 
factors  being  given  by  substitution  in  such  expressions  as 
/(I,  1)  x,  as  described  above).  It  is  clear  at  once  that  such  a 
process  can  yield  us  1  and  0,  and  cannot  yield  $  and  £.  And 
if  the  class-expressions  to  which  it  is  applied  are  in  their 
strict  shape,  that  is  if  their  terms  were  all  mutually  exclusive, 
it  can  only  yield  1  and  0;  for  any  substitutional  arrangement 
of  1  and  0  for  x  and  y,  whicli  caused  one  of  these  terms  not  to 
vanish,  would  cause  every  other  one  to  vanish.  This  follows 
from  the  very  meaning,  symbolically,  of  mutual  exclusiveness. 

But,  if  their  terms  are  not  mutually  exclusive,  then,  two 
or   more   of   them   overlapping,  we   may  get  such   factors 


ix.]  On  development  or  expansion.  209 

as  2,  3,  4,  or  in  fact  any  factor  higher  than  1.  Thus,  e.g., 
if  we  develop  x  +  y  +  xy  (which  may  be  taken  as  a  blundering 
expression  for  'x  or  y  or  both'),  in  which  the  element  xy 
is  counted  three  times  over,  we  should  find  this  definitely 
pointed  out  in  the  results  of  the  development,  by  xy  showing 
as  Sxy.  Whereas,  in  the  development  of  x  +  y  —  xy,  which 
can  be  so  arranged  that  the  terms  are  mutually  exclusive 
(#  +  %),  the  factor  of  xy  is  unity;  viz.  it  occurs  as  simply  xy. 

We  are  led  then  to  this  conclusion.  Expand  any  expres- 
sion which  consists  of  a  group  of  class  terms;  and  if  this 
expression  is  such  that  it  can  be  thrown  into  the  strict  form 
of  an  aggregate  of  mutually  exclusive  and  positive  class 
terms,  then  the  ultimate  elements  yielded  by  the  development 
will  either  appear  simply  and  singly,  or  vanish  entirely. 
That  is,  they  will  show  only  the  factors  1  and  0.  But 
if  they  were  not  mutually  exclusive  to  begin  with,  and  could 
not  be  arranged  so  as  to  be  so,  then  the  elements  must 
appear  affected  with  other  signs  than  1  and  0,  such  as 
~~  1>  ±2,  ±3,  &c. :  the  negative  signs  showing  that  the 
original  expressions  were  not  merely  badly  phrased  by  non- 
exclusiveness,  but  were  also  unmeaning,  by  asking  us  to 
deduct  when  nothing  was  given  from  which  to  deduct.  A 
moment's  reflection  upon  the  logical  significance  of  the 
process,  viz.  that  development  or  expansion  is  nothing  but 
subdivision  into  ultimate  elements,  will  show  that  these 
results  are  the  only  ones  which  could  be  expected  or 
justified. 

(2)  Now  consider  the  remaining,  and  only  remaining 
case  which  it  has  been  agreed  to  admit ;  that  is,  the  inverse 

(C 

case  when  we  have  a  fraction  such  as  -  where  the  numerator 

y 

and  denominator  are  both  of  them  class  groups  of  the  kind 

just  described.     The  only  difference  here  is  that  both  this 

V.  L.  14 


210  On  development  or  expansion.  [CHAP. 

numerator  and  denominator  can  now  yield  those  numerical 
factors,  and  no  others,  which  either  of  them  by  itself  could 
have  yielded  when  it  stood  as  a  simple  non-fractional  class 
group.  Naturally  this  lets  in  a  larger  range  of  possible 
numerical  factors;  for  though  the  expressions  x,  y,  and  so 
forth,  can  only  yield  1  and  Q,  it  is  clear  that  such  an  expres- 

a* 

sion  as  -  can  yield  these,  and  also  $  and  £. 

y  9 
First  consider  the  former  of  the  two  cases  noticed  above, 

viz.  that  in  which  each  class  group  composing  numerator  and 
denominator  is  duly  composed  of  mutually  exclusive  terms 
only.  Here  since  each  of  these  separately  can  (as  above 
shown)  yield  us  only  1  and  0,  the  combination  of  the  two  into 
a  fractional  form  can  yield  us  only  the  four  forms  1,  0,  $,  £. 
These  four  were,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  yielded  by  the  develop- 

sr 
ment  of  - . 

y 

Secondly,  when  either  or  both  of  these  numerators  and 
denominators  had  non-exclusive  terms  entering  into  it;  we 
saw  that,  in  addition  to  furnishing  such  numerical  factors  to 
the  class  elements  as  1  and  0,  they  might  also  furnish 
any  other  numerical  factor  as  well,  according  to  the  degree 
and  nature  of  their  defective  statement.  The  only  complica- 
tion that  is  thus  produced  is  that  the  final  elements  or 
subdivisions  of  such  an  ill-expressed  fractional  form  may 
possess  other  numerical  factors,  positive  or  negative,  besides 
the  true  typical  four  1,  0,  £,  £.  We  shall  have  to  take  some 
notice  of  such  irregular  results  as  these  hereafter.  At  present 
I  will  pass  them  over,  for  they  may  generally  be  avoided 
by  strict  attention  to  the  phrasing  of  our  formulae  in  the  first 
instance. 

If  it  be  asked  here,  as  it  very  fairly  may,  why  the  two 
peculiar  factors  $  and  £  thus  come  into  existence  when  we 


IX.]  On  development  or  expansion.  211 

develop  fractional  forms,  but  not  when  we  develop  what  may  be 
called,  by  contrast,  integral  forms,  the  answer  will  readily  be 
found  by  examining  into  the  process  by  which  they  are 
obtained.  (In  saying  this  we  are  supposed  to  be  asking  for  a 
logical  explanation,  since  the  mere  symbolic  answer  is  obvious 
at  a  glance: — for  clearly  fractions  like  §  and  i  can  only  be 
obtained  from  a  fractional  expression,  by  the  process  of  1  and  0 
substitution.) 

The  answer  is  this:  When  we  are  developing  an  integral 
form,  that  is,  a  mere  group  of  class  terms,  there  can  be  no 
indefiniteness  about  this  proceeding.  Now  $  is  the  sign 
of  entire  indefmiteness,  and  cannot  therefore  be  required 
here.  Of  course  if  there  was  an  indefinite  term  in  the 
original  class  group  it  will  reappear  in  the  subdivision: — 
thus,  for  instance,  x  +  %y  would  clearly  yield  terms  with  this 
indefinite  symbol  prefixed  to  them : — but  if  the  original 
group  was  definite  it  can  only  be  divisible  into  one  set  of 
ultimate  class  elements,  every  one  of  which  must  necessarily 
appear.  There  can  clearly  be  no  opening  for  uncertainty 
about  a  true  process  of  dichotomy.  Again,  as  regards  -J-. 
This  we  saw  implied  a  proposition  or  statement.  It  gave 
an  independent  relation  between  the  class  elements,  declaring 
that  such  a  class  was  non-existent.  For  anything  of  this  sort 
also  there  can  be  no  opening  in  a  mere  class  or  group  of 
classes. 

With  fractional  forms  the  case  is  of  course  different.     In 

Afl 

whatever  way  -  be  reached; — whether  as  a  direct  proposal 

«7 

indicated  in  that  shape,  or  as  obtained  indirectly  from  such  a 
statement  as  zy—x\-^^ it  makes  a  postulate.  It  accepts 
x  and  y  under  a  condition,  and  this  condition  can  of  course 
be  stated  in  a  proposition.  But  every  proposition  is  a 
material  limitation  of  the  formal  possibilities  of  expansion;  it 

14—2 


212  On  development  or  expansion.  [CHAP. 

extinguishes  one  or  more  of  the  classes  yielded  by  mere 
dichotomy  or  subdivision.  Thus  though  xy  is  a  mere  class, 

/*» 

-  is  a  class  with  a  condition  attached ;  and  it  is  this  condition 

y 

which,  leading  to  the  abolition  of  one  or  more  classes,  gives 
an  opening  for  the  directive  symbol  £  which  orders  the  suppres- 
sion of  such  classes. 

ST 

So   with   the   other   symbol   £.     Our   fractional  form   - 

i/ 

indicates  an  inverse  operation,  and  one  which,  as  customary 
in  such  cases,  does  not  lead  to  a  single  definite  answer.  The 
reply  may  very  likely  be  that,  within  assigned  limits,  any 
class  will  answer  our  purpose.  Such  an  indefinite  symbol  is 
therefore  distinctly  necessary. 

It  should  be  noticed  that  in  exceptional  cases  no  demand 
will  be  felt  for  either  of  these  peculiar  symbols,  the  conditions 
of  the  problem  not  giving  occasion  to  them.  Thus  take  the 

expression  -*• *— .    On  expansion  this  yields  xy  -f  xyz  +  §#, 

sc 

but  the   usual   condition   (corresponding  to  xy  =  Q,  in  the 

/*% 

development  of  the  simpler  fractional  expression  -)  gives  here 

*/ 

(xy  +  xyz)  (1  —  x)  =  0,  which  is  identically  true.  That  is,  no 
condition  of  relation  between  the  symbols  is  demanded  for  the 
performance  of  the  operation  in  question ;  it  can  always 
be  done,  whatever  relation  exists  between  them.  The  logical 
explanation  of  this  is  easy  to  detect;  for,  x  includes  xy  +  xyz, 
formally  and  without  further  postulate.  Hence  it  must 
always  be  possible  to  find  a  class  such  that  its  limitation 
by  x  shall  reduce  it  to  xy  +  xyz,  which  is  the  inverse  opera- 
tion called  for.  If  it  be  known  that  X  includes  Y,  we 
can  always  find  a  multiplier  (that  is,  in  logical  language,  some 
principle  of  selection,)  which  shall  reduce  X  to  Y. 


IX.]  On  development  or  expansion.  213 

Again,  as  regards  the  possible  absence  of  terms  affected 
by  the  indefinite  sign  g,  take  the  following  example: — 

xy  +  xy  +  xy 

xy  +  xy  +  xy ' 

Expand  it,  and  it  becomes  simply  xy  +  xy,  the  term  which 
would  have  been  affected  by  $  vanishing  formally.  The  full 
logical  explanation  of  this  had  better  be  deferred  until  we 
have  adequately  discussed  the  meaning  and  interpretation  of 
logical  equations,  but  the  symbolic  conditions  for  its  occurrence 

X 

are  easily  seen.     The  indefinite  factor  in  y  is  of  course  %XY ; 

it  will  therefore  vanish  whenever  XY  =  0.  That  is,  if  X  and  Y 
together  make  up,  or  more  than  make  up,  the  total  universe 
(for  this  is  the  meaning  of  X  Y=  0)  then  the  inverse  operation 
ceases  to  be  indefinite  l. 

This  peculiar  symbol  $,  perhaps  the  most  distinctive 
feature  in  the  Symbolic  Logic,  has  been  much  objected  to. 
We  shall  have  to  discuss  it  again  on  several  future  occasions, 
but  enough  has  now  been  said  to  show  that  it  is  very  far  from 
being  borrowed  in  needless  affectation  from  the  mathema- 
ticiaus.  If  we  chose  to  reject  it  we  should  still  have  to 
invent  some  symbol  to  take  its  place,  and  where  else  is  such 
a  symbol  to  be  found  which  shall  really  express  the  full 
indefiniteuess  we  need  ?  There  is  no  such  word  in  the 
ordinary  logical  vocabulary,  for  'some'  in  both  its  senses 
('some,  it  may  be  all',  and  'some,  but  not  all')  excludes  none, 
and  therefore  will  not  answer  our  purpose.  We  saw  indeed, 
in  Chap,  viz.,  that  x  —  xy  is  really,  though  not  very  obviously, 

1  In  which  case,  indeed,  this  in-  .Y 

,.        ,  ,.          or  T=-i»  which  is  identically  true 

verse    operation    loses    all    peculiar  1 

significance.  For,  if  XY=-  0,  as  well  as      whatever  may  be  the  value  of  A'. 
XY=0,  then  F=l;  so  that=XF 


214  On  development  or  expansion.  [CHAP. 

the  precise  equivalent  of  #  =  §y ;  but  we  could  not  conveni- 
ently work  with  this  equivalent  in  our  developments,  for 
it  demands  the  repetition  of  the  whole  of  one  side  of  the 
equation  on  the  other  side.  If  we  tried  to  employ  it  as 

a  substitute  for  £  in  the  development  of  - ,  viz.  xy  +  %xy,  we 

J 

QJ  SC 

should  have  to  write  it  -  =  xy  +  -  x  xy,  when  the  impropriety 

«/  J' 

of  substituting  an  implicit  equation  instead  of  an  explicit 
becomes  glaring.  If  we  object  to  make  use  of  g  in  Logic  we 
shall  simply  have  to  invent  another  symbol  and  define  it  in 
precisely  the  same  sense.  At  least  we  should  have  to  do  this 
if  we  undertook  to  work  the  same  problems  with  the  same 
generality. 

The  reason  why  we  require  this  symbol,  whereas  the 
ordinary  Logic  manages  to  do  without  it,  must  be  assigned  to 
the  completeness  of  the  Symbolic  System.  The  ordinary  Logic 
answers  what  it  can,  and  simply  lets  alone  what  it  cannot 
answer,  whilst  what  the  more  general  system  aims  at  is 
to  specify  the  direction  and  amount  of  our  ignorance,  in 
relation  to  the  given  data,  as  explicitly  as  that  of  our 
knowledge.  We  take  into  consideration  every  class  which 
any  combination  of  the  terms  in  question  can  yield,  and 
enquire  what  information  the  data  will  furnish  in  reference  to 
it.  As  Prof.  G.  B.  Halsted  has  well  said,  "The  problem  may 
be  very  compactly  stated  :v. It  is:  Given  any  assertions,  to 
determine  precisely  what  they  affirm,  precisely  what  they 
deny,  and  precisely  what  they  leave  in  doubt,  separately  arid 
jointly"1. 

We  are  now  in  a  position  finally  to  explain  the  various 

1  Journal  of  Speculative  Philoso-  in  each  of  which  there  are  some 
phy,  Jan.  1878.  See  also  the  same  valuable  critical  remarks  by  the  same 
journal  for  Oct.  1878,  and  Jan.  1879,  author  on  Boole's  system. 


ix.]  On  development  or  expansion.  215 

elements  which  make  their  appearance  in  the  development  of 
one  of  these  fractional  forms  which  demand  the  performance 
of  an  inverse  operation.  If  our  data  have  been  properly 
expressed  in  mutually  exclusive  terms  at  the  outset,  our 
result  must  necessarily  be  comprised  in  the  following  form  :  — 


where  X,  A,  B,  C,  D  are  aggregates  of  class  elements 
composed  of  the  various  combinations  of  the  class  terms 
x,  y,  z,  &c.,  and  their  contradictories. 

Here  then  X,  on  the  left  side,  is  a  class  term.  The 
succession  of  expressions  on  the  right  side  may  be  taken  as  a 
description  or  definition  of  X  given  us  in  terms  of  x,  y,  z,  &c. 
or  whatever  the  symbols  of  the  classes  may  be.  Now  what 
we  are  told  in  this  equation  is  that,  in  order  fully  to 
determine  X  as  desired,  we  must  ;  — 

1.  Take  the  whole  of  A;  A  consisting  of  one  or  more 
class  elements.     Hence  conversely,  the  whole  of  A  is  included 
in  X.     Ordinary  Logic  would  express  this  by  saying,  'Some  X 
is  A',  and'AllJ.  is  X'. 

2.  Exclude  from  X  the  whole  of  the  class  B:  —  or,  to  put 
it  in  ordinary  language,  '  No  X  is  B'. 

3.  As  to  the  entry  of  the  class  C  into  X\  we  can,  from 
the  given  data,  determine  nothing  whatever.     All  (7,  or  some 
only,  or  none  of  it,  may  go  to  the  making  up  of  X.     To 
decide  this  more  explicitly,  we  should  require  fresh  infor- 
mation. 

4.  As  to  D,  this  class  is  not  merely  excluded  from  X,  as 
B  was,  but  may  be  proved  from  the  given  data  to  be  an 
impossible  or  non-existent  class.     The  compartments  referred 
to  in  D  have  of  course  to  be  taken  notice  of,  but  our  data 
pronounce  them  by  implication  to  be  empty. 

There  are  two  questions  which  may  fairly  be  raised  here, 
and  which  demand  a  few  moments'  consideration. 


216  On  development  or  expansion.  [CHAP. 

I.  It   may  possibly  be  objected  that  though  we  have 
thus   determined  the  relation   of    X  to    the    four    classes 
A,  B,  C,  D  and  to  all  the  sub-classes  which  they  contain 
under  them,  there  may  yet  be  other  classes,  of  a  similar  kind 
to  these,  of  which  we  have  taken  no  account,  for  the  possible 
combinations  of  x,  y,  z,  &c.  and  their   contradictories   are 
numerous.     The  reply  is   that  there   are  no  other  classes 
possible,   for    however    numerous    they    may  be    they  are 
all  comprised  in  A,  B,  C  and  D.    The  veiy  nature  of  Develop- 
ment insures  that  every  possible  combination  (logically)   of 
our  class  terms  shall  be  taken  due  notice  of. 

II.  But,  again,  it  may  be  asked,  What  about  the  existence 
of  these  classes  referred  to  in  A,  B,  and  C\    Must  there  be 
things   corresponding  to   these   various   class    terms  ?     The 
answer  to  this  question  is  contained  in  the  results  of  a  former 
chapter  (Chap,  vi.)  and  is  briefly  this.     Negation  is  positive 
and  final ;  therefore  every  one  of  the  classes  which  go  to  make 
up  D  is  certainly  abolished:    there  can  be  no  such  things 
as  these.     Moreover  we  know  for  certain  (on  formal  grounds) 
that  some  one  class  at  least  of  those  included  in  A,  B,  and  C, 
must  exist.    But  beyond  this  we  can  only  speak  hypothetically, 
as  in   all   positive   assertion.     If  there   are   any  A's    then 
the  same  things  must  also  be  X,  thus  establishing  that  there 
must  then  be  X.     The   existence   of  a  B,   however,  or  a 
C,  proves  nothing  about  there  being  X.     Conversely,  if  there 
be  any  X,  the  things  which  are  X  must  be  either  A  or  C, 
so  that  one  of  these  is  proved  to  exist,  but  we  cannot  tell 
which. 

Illustrations  and  Examples. 

I  append  a  few  pages  of  illustration,  purposely  choosing 
for  the  most  part  extreme  or  limiting  cases  in  the  application 


ix.]  On  development  or  expansion.  217 

of  the  simplest  formulae,  as  these  subserve  the  purpose  of 
explaining  the  principles  of  this  Development  better  than 
others. 

Begin  with  one  class  term  only,  x,  and  see  how  many 
forms  we  can  obtain  with  our /'(a:)  =/(!)  sc  +./(0)  x.  Of  what 
we  have  called  integral  forms  there  are  the  following  four : — 
1,  0,  x,  x;  which  yield  the  developments, 


They  stand  in  need  of  no  explanation.  Logically,  they 
represent  the  results  of  subdividing  (or,  we  should  rather  say, 
attempting  to  subdivide)  the  four  classes,  'everything', 
'nothing',  'x ',  and  'not-#',  into  their  x  and  not-#  parts  respec- 
tively. Of  course  only  'everything'  can  really  be  so  divided. 

Of  fractional  forms  with  one  class  term,  we  have  sixteen, 
since  any  one  of  the  above  four  may  stand  as  either  numerator 
or  denominator.  Qf  these  however  the  four  with  unity 
as  denominator  are  identical  with  the  above  integral  forms, 
thus  leaving  twelve.  They  should  all  be  carefully  worked 
through  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  perfect  command  of  the 
logical  meaning  and  symbolic  usage  of  our  various  forms. 
They  are  as  follows: — 

1      -  =  x     r~  "      -  =  ±x     <>x 

x  0 

2.     -  =  #  +  &«.  6.     n  =  $x  +  7j®- 

«•  V  II  v  V 


3.  =  o#  +  $c.  7.       = 

X  \j 

4.  =0*  +    z.  8.        = 


218  On  development  or  expansion.  [CHAP. 

+  x.  11.     —  = 

x 

10.     ^r=}>x  +  Qx.  12.     -?-  = 

a;     °  a; 

We  will  briefly  examine  a  few  of  these  results  in  turn ; 
sometimes  in  accordance  with  one,  sometimes  in  accordance 
with  the  other,  of  the  two  ways  already  pointed  out  for 
approaching  these  fractional  forms ;  that  is,  either  by  taking 
them  as  immediate  demands  for  the  performance  of  an  inverse 
process,  or  as  stating  a  conditional  proposition  which  leads  to 
such  a  demand. 

1.  This  asks  us  the  question,  What  is  that  class  which, 
when  restricted  by  taking  only  the  ic-part  of  it,  will  yield 
the  class  'all'  ?     A  little  reflection  will  show  that  the  only 
class  of  which  this  can  be  said  is  'all';  viz.  this  is  the  limiting 
case  in  which  the  imposition  of  a  restriction  is  merely,  as  it 
happens,  leaving  the  class  unaltered.     (The  formula  indicates 
this  by  the  term  ^x;  reminding  us  that  x  =  0,  viz.  1  —  x  =  0 
or  x  =  1.) 

2.  This  is  in  reality  a  very  familiar  old  friend  of  every 
logician,  for  it  is  nothing  else  than  'accidental  conversion' 
done  up  in  a  new  dress,  and,  I  would  add,  far  more  accurately 
expressed.     No  doubt  it  sounds  very  unfamiliar,  even  when 
put  out  of  symbols  into  words,  if  we  phrase  it  as  '  What  is  the 
most  general   expression   of  that  class  which,  restricted  by 
taking  only  the   a-part  of  it,  will  coincide   with  xV    But 
we   shall   soon  recognize  its  features  if  we  look  at  it  this 
way : — Suppose  we  had  given  us  that  yx  —  xt  and  were  asked, 


.7,- 


What  then  is  y  in  general  ?    This  would  have  led  to  y  —  - ,  as 


x 


above,  which  is  asking  for  y  in  terms  of  x.  Now  it  was 
shown  in  Chap.  VII.  that  the  expression,  or  rather  an  ex- 
pression, for  the  universal  proposition  'All  x  is  y'  is  x  =  xy. 


ix.]  On  development  or  expansion.  219 

Hence  it  is  clear  that  to  ask  for  y  in  terms  of  x,  under  this 
condition  (as  is  done  symbolically  above),  and  to  ask  '  If  all  x 
is  y,  what  is  y?'  are  really  one  and  the  same  question. 

Now  compare  our  solution  here  with  the  common  solution. 
We  say  that  y  =  x  +  $  x,  whilst  the  common  answer  says 
simply  'Some  y  is  x\  The  advantage  of  the  former  seems  to 
be  that  it  so  prominently  forces  on  our  attention  (by  the  em- 
ployment of  the  peculiar  symbol  $)  several  possible  cases 
which  the  common  answer  rather  tends  to  obscure  from  sight. 
We  are  reminded  for  instance  that  x  may  be  the  whole  of  y 
(if  §  happens  to  =  0) ;  that  it  may  be  a  part  only  (if  g  is 
intermediate  between  0  and  1);  or  that  y  itself  may  be  'all' 
(if  &  =  1).  These  three  alternatives  may  of  course  be  deduced 
from  the  common  form  of  conclusion,  but  they  certainly  do 
not  appear  very  prominently  in  it,  especially  considering  the 
ambiguity  of  the  word  some. 

I  would  also  call  the  reader's  attention  to  the  very 
decisive  way  in  which  all  those  troublesome  and  perplexing 
questions,  as  to  what  is  implicated  in  the  way  of  the  existence 
of  our  x  and  y,  are  avoided  by  this  way  of  regarding  the 
subject.  Once  understand  that  'all  x  is-  y'  is  only  uncon- 
ditional in  what  it  denies  (i.e.  in  denying  that  there  is  any 
xy};  and  employ  the  truly  indefinite  symbol  §  instead  of 
some,  and  a  proposition  and  its  converse  will  fit  in  har- 
moniously with  any  number  of  other  propositions  without 
inconsistency  or  demand  for  fresh  assumption.  For  instance : 
start  with  'all  x  is  y'  in  the  form  xy  =  Q,  thus  blotting  out 
one  class.  Now  elicit  x  from  this,  and  we  get  x=%y  (the 

reader  will  easily  verify  this  conclusion  as  follows:  #  =  -, 

therefore  by  development  x  =  %  y}.  The  implication  is  clear 
and  decisive,  and  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  unconditional 
negation  above.  We  see  that  if  there  be  x  there  must  be  y, 


220  On  development  or  expansion.  [CHAP. 

and  that  if  there  be  y  there  may  be  x ;  but  that  there  may  be 
neither  one  nor  the  other.  Then  go  on  to  convert  xy  =  0,  or 
x  =  %y,  and  we  get,  as  above,  y  =  x  +  £  x.  Here  the  same  im- 
plications meet  us  as  clearly  as  before: — if  there  be  any  x 
there  must  be  y,  but  if  there  be  any  y  there  need  not  be  x 
(since  the  y  may  be  contributed  by  the  term  $  x).  And  there 
need  not  be  either  x  or  y. 

As  just  remarked,  the  two  assumptions  upon  which  this 
explanation  rests  are  (1)  the  unconditional  negative  interpre- 
tation of  the  universal  affirmative,  and  (2)  the  employment  of 
the  perfectly  indeterminate  symbol  $  in  place  of  the  ordinary 
some. 

3.  This  result  is  best  interpreted  as  follows.     Suppose 
#y  =  0,  viz.  'No  x  is  y\  What  do  we  know  about  y?  The 
equation  y  =  $  x  tells  us  that  y,  if  it  exist,  must  lie  outside  x, 
but  that  there  may  be  no  y  at  all  (if  §  =  0) ;  that  there  may 
be  some  y\  or  that  the  y  may  be  the  whole  of  x  (if  £  =  ] ),  in 
which  case  x  and  y  are  (materially)  contradictory  opposites. 

4.  This  development  must  have  come  about  from  such  a 
statement  as  that  lxy  is  the  same  as  not-a;'.   We  can  save  this 
from  being  nonsense  or  contradiction  (on  the  principles  laid 
down  in  Chap.  VI.),  only  by  supposing  that  there  is  no  such 
class  as  y,  and  that  x  is  'all',  for 'all  nothing'  is  the  same  as 
'  no  all '.     The  development  expresses  this  condition. 

C.  This  is  the  development  of  an  entirely  indefinite  class, 
and  is  therefore  itself  entirely  indefinite.  The  nearest  verbal 
equivalent  would  be  the  direction  to  subdivide  'something' 
into  its  x  and  not-#  portions.  We  could  but  say  that  this 
would  yield  some  x  and  some  not-#.  After  what  has  been 
already  said  in  explanation  of  this  symbol  $  the  reader  will 
hardly  need  to  be  reminded  that  we  regard  it  as  a  strictly 
interpretable  expression.  It  is  the  determination  (if  we  may 


ix.]  On  development  or  expansion.  221 

use  the  word)  of  a  class  which  proves  to  be  strictly  indeter- 
minable. 

7.  This  is  of  course  an  instance  of  gross  misapplication  of 
our  formula.  The  universe  being  1,  the  expression  ^  is 
logically  unmeaning  as  a  class  term.  The  demand  which 
it  makes  is  that  we  shall  find  some  class  such  that  when  no 
part  of  it  is  taken  we  shall  still  have,  as  a  result,  all ;  (0^=1). 
Our  formula  resents  being  told  to  work  upon  such  an 
impossible  class  as  this,  in  the  way  that  formulae  generally 
do  resent  such  a  call,  viz.  by  just  talking  nonsense.  It 
responds  to  the  demand  by  declaring  that  there  is  neither  a? 
nor  not-# : — as  good  a  reply  as  any  other  under  the  circum- 
stances. 

As  the  remaining  examples  do  not  raise  any  interesting 
questions  except  what  are  contained  in  such  as  have  been 
already  noticed  we  will  not  go  into  them  any  further.  The 
reader  is  however  recommended  to  work  through  them  all  in 
order  to  familiarize  himself  with  the  interpretation  of  general 
formulae  in  critical  and  limiting  cases. 


CHAPTER  X. 

LOGICAL  STATEMENTS  OH  EQUATIONS. 

HAVING  thus  considered  the  nature  of  Development  or 
Subdivision,  which  may  be  considered  an  introduction  to  the 
central  subject  of  Logic,  we  must  now  go  on  to  consider  this 
main  subject  itself  under  the  heads  of  Logical  Equations,  and 
Interpretation  and  Solution  of  Logical  Equations.  This  latter 
division  may  be  said,  roughly  speaking,  to  correspond  to  that 
between  Propositions  and  Reasonings  in  ordinary  Logic, 
though  here  as  elsewhere  our  arrangement  of  the  subject  is 
very  far  from  coinciding  with  the  traditional  one.  We  shall 
devote  this  and  the  following  chapters  to  the  consideration  of 
these  topics. 

There  are  two  main  principles  of  interpretation  to  which 
we  shall  have  to  appeal  in  the  course  of  this  discussion.  As 
neither  of  them  is  distinctly  recognized  in  the  ordinary  Logic, 
and  both  are  in  some  respects  decidedly  alien  to  the  ways  of 
common  thought  and  speech,  it  will  be  well  to  begin  by 
calling  prominent  attention  to  them. 

(1)  The  first  of  these  is  involved  in  the  view  of  the 
Import  of  Propositions  explained  and  insisted  on  in  the 
sixth  chapter.  The  comparative  novelty  of  that  view  as  a 


CHA.P.  x.]          Logical  statements  or  equations.  223 

systematic  doctrine,  and  its  extreme  importance  for  our 
present  purpose,  must  be  the  excuse  for  once  more  recalling 
the  reader's  attention  to  it. 

It  was  laid  down  then  that  propositions  must  be  regarded 
as  having,  generally  speaking,  an  affirmative  interpretation 
of  a  conditional  and  somewhat  complex  character,  and  a 
negative  interpretation  which  is  unconditional  and  compa- 
ratively simple.  That  is,  what  they  assert  can  only  be 
accepted  under  hypotheses  and  provisionally,  in  so  far  as  the 
existence  of  the  objects  is  concerned,  whereas  what  they  can 
be  made  to  deny  is  denied  absolutely.  This  contrast  presented 
itself  even  in  the  case  of  the  simple  propositions  of  the  common 
Logic,  but  when  we  come  to  the  complicated  systems  of 
propositions  which  we  must  be  prepared  to  grapple  with  in 
Symbolic  Logic,  it  appears  to  me  that  without  this  explana- 
tion we  can  make  no  way  at  all. 

It  must  be  frankly  admitted  that  this  is  not  the  sense  in 
which  the  popular  mind  accepts  and  interprets  propositions. 
Nor  is  it,  I  presume,  in  accordance  with  the  canons  of 
the  common  Logic; — and  very  reasonably  not  so,  on  the 
part  of  the  latter;  for  using,  as  this  does,  forms  which  are  but 
little  removed  from  those  of  common  speech,  it  cannot  risk  so 
complete  a  breach  with  convention  as  we  may  freely  do  who 
deal  mostly  with  symbols.  I  speak  with  reserve  however  on 
this  point  from  really  not  knowing  what  the  law  may  be. 

(2)  The  other  principle  to  which  we  shall  have  to  resort 
may  be  conveniently  introduced  by  the  following  question. 
If  any  one  were  to  declare  to  us  that  his  annual  income  and 
the  acreage  of  his  estate,  taken  together,  amounted  to 
precisely  £500  and  his  daughters,  could  we  charge  him  on 
the  face  of  the  matter  with  either  falsity  o?  nonsense  ?  He 
has  adopted  an  unusual  way  of  speaking,  but  a  solecism  need 
not  be  without  meaning.  If  we  insisted  on  translating 


224  Logical  statements  or  equations.  [CHAP. 

his  words  strictly,  what  sort  of  construction  should  we  have 
to  put  upon  them,  neglecting  all  merely  conventional  impli- 
cations ?  We  should  have  to  say  that,  since  it  is  impossible  to 
equate  heterogeneous  things,  the  only  solution  which  will 
avoid  actual  nonsense  must  be  found  in  the  conclusion  that 
his  income  is  £500,  and  that  he  has  no  acres  and  no 
daughters. 

The  second  of  these  principles  involves  of  course  an 
appeal  to  the  first.  Admitting  that  the  employment  of  a 
logical  term  does  not  necessarily  carry  with  it  the  existence 
of  any  corresponding  class,  we  say  that  these  are  circumstances 
under  which  this  admission  has  to  be  put  in  force.  Disparate 
things  can  only  be  equated  by  the  assumption  that  both  are 
then  and  there  non-existent. 

There  is  a  slightly  different  way  of  looking  at  the  same 
thing  which  may  make  it  a  little  more  acceptable.  Instead 
of  starting,  as  above,  with  the  statement  x  =  y,  where  x  and  y 
are  heterogeneous,  put  it  in  the  form  that  if  y  be  taken  from 
x  nothing  is  left.  Suppose  I  say,  in  reference  to  some  given 
assemblage  of  people,  Take  all  the  rogues  from  amongst  the 
lawyers  and  nobody  is  left,  it  is  quite  certain  that  this 
identifies  the  two  classes.  This  is  a  necessity  of  thought  or 
of  things;  but  to  this  necessity  common  usage  couples  an 
assumption,  which  ordinary  Logic  doubtfully  accepts,  viz. 
that  we  must  not  so  speak  unless  we  mean  to  imply  that 
there  are  certainly  some  people  present  who  belong  to 
both  categories.  Symbolic  Logic  distinctly  rejecting  this 
assumption  need  not  hesitate  to  accept  at  the  same  time  the 
proposition  that  no  lawyers  are  rogues.  In  this  case,  since 
the  subduction  of  a  rogue  can  no  longer  remove  a  lawyer  the 
statement  can  only  hold  good  on  the  supposition  that  there 
is  none  of  either  class  present.  In  other  words,  whereas 
the  logical  equation,  x  —  y  =  0,  necessarily  and  always  implies 


X.]  Logical  statements  or  equations.  225 

the  identity  of  x  and  y,  all  that  we  are  now  doing  is  to  claim 
the  right  of  extending  this  to  the  limiting  case  in  which 
x  and  y  are  both  =  0 ;  and  consequently  of  inferring  that 
if  x  and  y  are  known  to  be  mutually  exclusive  then  this 
Limiting  case  is  the  only  possible  one. 

It  can  hardly  be  maintained  that  this  system  of  interpre- 
tation is  much  more  in  accordance  with  popular  convention 
than  the  former  was.  The  complaint  here  would  presumably 
be,  not  that  we  were  misinterpreting  statements,  but  that  we 
were  displaying  a  pedantic  and  lawyer-like1  determination  to 
insist  upon  an  interpretation  of  a  statement  which  was 
absurdly  put.  They  are  both  principles  however  which 
are  certainly  legitimate.  No  one  can  say  that  they  actually 
contradict  or  defy  any  known  law  of  thought,  or  any  express 
enactment  of  Logic  (the  latter  of  them  indeed  errs,  if  at  all, 
from  excessive  adherence  to  the  law).  Some  assumption  or 
understanding  therefore  is  necessary  in  reference  to  both,  and 
it  will  be  found,  I  think,  that  no  other  than  that  here 
adopted  will  prove  capable  of  working  in  a  really  general 
symbolic  system.  Anyhow  we  shall  make  use  of  them  both, 
and  since  it  is  well  to  do  nothing  unusual  without  warning, 
attention  is  here  prominently  directed  to  them. 

But  it  will  be  readily  seen  that  the  principle  we  have 
thus  invoked  is  of  wider  application.  It  is  not  merely  true 
that  the  statement  x—y  =  0,  when  x  and  y  are  exclusives, 
leads  to  x  =  0,  y  =  0.  The  same  holds  good  when  such 
mutual  exclusives  are  combined  by  way  either  of  addition  or 

1  Not  I  presume  that  the  lawyers  premium  was  under  five  pounds  ster- 

would  so  determine  such  a  question.  ling:    the   Court    of    King's  Bench 

De  Morgan  (Syllabus,  p.  12)  gives  held    that    the    exemption  did  not 

the  following  example  on  a  somewhat"  apply  when  there  was  no  premium  at 

analogous  point:  "An  Act  was  once  all,  because  'no  premium  at  all'  is 

passed  exempting  indentures  [of  ap-  not  'a  premium  under  five  pounds.'  " 
prenticeship]  from  duty  when  the 

V.  L.  15 


226  Logical  statements  or  equations.  [CHAP. 

subtraction,  and  when  each  of  them  i-s  multiplied  by  any 
numerical  factors  whatever.  That  is  to  say,  such  an  expres- 
sion as  ax  ±  by  ±  cz  ±  &c.  =  0,  (so  long  as  x,  y,  z,  &c.  are 
independent  class  terms)  necessarily  leads  to  x  =  0,  y  —  0,  z  =  0. 
This  follows  from  the  very  meaning  and  employment  of  our 
class  terms.  Really  exclusive  or  independent  classes  are 
absolutely  powerless  upon  one  another ;  it  is  not  possible  for 
one  to  neutralize  another  and  thus  to  offer  an  alternative 
for  the  common  extinction  of  all.  We  must  not  be  misled  by 
the  analogy  of  ordinary  mathematics,  where  we  add  and 
subtract  magnitudes,  and  where  in  consequence  there  are 
many  different  ways  of  adjusting  the  contributions  of  the 
separate  items  in  a  total,  whether  that  total  be  zero  or 
anything  else.  If  any  analogy  is  sought  in  that  direction  it 
must  be  in  the  equation  to  zero  of  the  sum  of  a  number  of 
squares,  which  involves  the  separate  equation  to  zero  of  each 
element  of  the  total1.  In  Logic,  if  any  kind  of  aggregate,  of 
the  addition  and  subtraction  kind,  is  declared  equal  to 
nothing,  the  only  way  out  of  the  difficulty  is  in  the  declara- 
tion that  each  separate  element  is  also  nothing :  provided,  as 
remarked,  that  these  elements  are  mutually  exclusive8. 

The  reader  must  carefully  observe  that  this  is  no  case  of 
arbitrary  assumption  or  definition  on  our  part.  All  that 
we  are  now  doing  is  to  insist  upon  a  stringent  interpretation 

1  A  still  more  apposite  analogy  neons  or  disparate  things  in  t ,  j,  k. 
is  offered  here,  as  indeed  in  some  2  The  addition  (when  equated  to 
other  directions,  in  the  Science  of  zero)  of  a  number  of  class  terms, 
Quaternions.  The  single  equation  it  will  be  observed,  would  also  lead 
xi  +  yj  +  z  k = { i  +  rjj '<  +  f /c  does  not  there  to  the  same  result  whether  they  were 
lead  to  the  indeterminateness  of  an  exclusive  or  not.  But  this  is  a  mat- 
ordinary  algebraic  equation,  but  no-  tor  of  procedure  merely,  for  we  could 
cessitates  separately ;  at  once  put  them  into  such  a  form : 

*=£,   y=ij,  «  =  £  e.g.  x  +  y  =  0  is  equivalent  to 
And  the  reason  is  the  same,  viz.  2xy  +  xy+xy=Q. 

that   we    are    comparing   heteroge- 


x.]  Logical  statements  or  equations.  227 

of  the  definitions  and  rules  formerly  laid  down.  Indeed  we 
may  say  more  than  this ;  that  we  are  only  insisting  upon  such 
interpretation  as  must  be  admitted  to  be  obligatory  according 
to  the  forms  and  regulations  of  common  speech,  though 
it  would  naturally  be  complained  of  there  as  pedantic  and 
over  fastidious.  If  one  were  to  say  that  on  adding  the 
Englishmen  in  an  assembly  to  twice  the  Frenchmen,  and 
subducting  the  Dutch  three  times  over,  there  was  nobody 
left,  could  any  other  conclusion  be  reached  than  that  there 
were  neither  Englishmen,  Frenchmen  nor  Dutch  there  ? 
The  original  statement  was  expressed  in  a  very  absurd 
manner,  and  we  should  probably  be  charged  with  over- 
refining  in  attempting  to  make  anything  whatever  out 
of  it,  instead  of  summarily  rejecting  it;  but  admitting  that  it 
is  to  be  interpreted  logically,  this,  and  nothing  else,  is 
the  conclusion.  (It  is  merely  a  concrete  instance  of 
x  +  2y  —  3z  =  0,  where  x,  y,  and  z  are  known  to  be  exclusives : 
this  leads  to  x  =  0,  y  =  0,  z—  0.) 

It  will  now  be  seen  therefore,  that  in  order  to  analyze 
a  logical  statement,  and  to  extract  from  it  the  sum-total 
of  what  it  has  to  tell  us,  all  that  is  necessary  is  to  break 
it  up  into  a  series  of  mutually  exclusive  terms  the  sum 
of  which  is  declared  equal  to  zero.  If  this  can  be  done 
without  injury  or  loss  of  significance,  then  the  information 
yielded  by  the  statement  can  be  read  off  at  once  in  all 
its  details,  in  the  form  of  a  number  of  separate  denials. 
This,  it  may  be  pointed  out,  is  the  full  analytical  process ;  the 
subsequent  synthetic  process,  which  seeks  to  build  up  these 
details  into  new  forms  and  thus  fully  to  interpret  them, 
will  have  to  be  discussed  in  a  future  chapter.  The  full 
importance,  from  a  theoretic  point  of  view,  of  the  Kule 
of  Development  explained  in  the  last  chapter  will  there- 
fore be  apparent.  The  desired  result,  viz.  of  securing  that 

15—2 


228  Logical  statements  or  equations.  [CHAP. 

some  complicated  expression  shall  be  broken  up  into  all 
its  ultimate  and  consequently  mutually  exclusive  elements,  is 
precisely  that  for  which  this  Poile  is  devised. 

We  might  begin  then  at  once  by  appealing  to  this  Rule, 
and  this  would  be  the  most  complete  and  perfect  form  of 
solution.  But  an  intelligent  appreciation  of  the  nature  and 
significance  of  the  step  we  have  to  take  will  better  be 
secured  by  beginning  somewhat  more  in  detail,  and  with 
more  direct  appeal  to  familiar  logical  considerations. 

I.  Take  then  the  simple  case  of  an  explicit  statement, 
by  which  is  here  meant  one  in  which  we  have  only  a  single 
term  standing  by  itself  on  one  side,  this  being  equated, 
on  the  other  side,  to  a  group  of  terms.  We  must  suppose 
that  the  component  elements  of  the  group  which  constitutes 
one  side  are  arranged  in  their  due  and  suitable  form,  in 
which  they  appear  as  a  sum  or  aggregate  of  a  number  of 
mutually  exclusive  terms.  In  fact  this  is  demanded,  for 
there  is  no  meaning  in  declaring  a  single  class  to  be 
identical  with  a  group  wherein  some  of  the  components 
are  counted  several  times  over. 

Take  as  a  specimen, 

(1). 


When  this  is  put  into  words  what  it  amounts  to  is  simply 
that  we  here  have  a  description,  definition,  or  synonyme 
of  any  kind  (neglecting,  as  we  do,  all  but  the  denotative 
import  of  our  terms,  these  various  expressions  are  regarded 
by  us  as  equivalent)  of  w  in  terms  of  x,  y,  and  z.  The 
individuals  referred  to  by  w  are  identical  with  the  aggregate 
of  the  individuals  referred  to  by  the  three  terms  equated 
to  w.  Of  course  as  regards  the  expression  or  extension  of  our 
knowledge  by  such  a  statement,  various  views  may  be  taken. 
If  all  the  three  terms  on  the  right  hand  are  known  in 


X.]  Logical  statements  or  equations.  229 

themselves,  or  through  their  component  elements,  then  w 
may  be  known  thereby.  If  w  were  known,  then  we  have 
one  condition  assigned  by  which  to  determine  the  other 
elements.  If  we  happen  to  be  equally  familiar  with  both, 
then  the  equation  may  be  regarded  as  a  statement  of 
our  knowledge.  Our  particular  personal  relation  to  any  of 
our  statements  is  not  indeed  a  matter  with  which  Logic  need 
be  supposed  to  trouble  itself. 

As  regards  the  verbal  statement  of  such  a  proposition  the 
reader  will  observe  how  entirely  it  is  a  matter  of  our  own 
choice  whether  we  throw  it  into  the  categorical,  hypothetical 
or  disjunctive  form.  There  may  be  no  such  things  really  as 
w,  xyz,  xy,  &c.;  or  some  only  of  these  classes  may  be  missing. 
If  we  want  to  avoid  any  reference  to  such  a  contingency, — 
as  common  logic  mostly  does, — then  we  should  put  it  either 
collectively  by  saying,  'the  w's  are  identical  with  the  sum  of 
the  things  which  are  xyz,  or  y  and  not-#,  or  x  and  neither  y 
nor  z\  or  distributively  'every  w  is  either  xyz,  y  and  not-#,  or 
x  and  neither  y  nor  z\  If  we  wish  to  call  attention  to  the  fact 
that  our  terms  only  hold  their  life,  so  to  say,  subject  to  the 
conditions  entailed  by  other  propositions  as  well,  then  we 
might  say  'if  there  be  any  w  it  must  be  either  xyz,  &c.'  The 
popular  expressions  which  thus  cover  the  ground  of  a  single 
symbolic  statement  are  very  various. 

So  much  for  the  affirmative  interpretations  of  our  equa- 
tion or  proposition;  let  us  now  look  at  the  negative  interpre- 
tation. We  begin,  as  usual,  with  examining  the  question  on 
purely  logical  grounds,  before  looking  at  it  through  the 
medium  of  mere  symbols.  What  the  statement  said  was 
that  the  whole  of  w  was  confined  to  a  certain  number  of 
compartments,  and  conversely ,  that  every  class  of  things 
occupying  any  of  these  compartments  must  be  a  w.  Now,  on 
the '  system  of  making  a  perfectly  exhaustive  scheme  of 


230  Logical  statements  or  equations.  [CHAP. 

classification  out  of  our  class  terms,  it  is  clear  that  to  say  w 
is  within  certain  compartments  is  precisely  equivalent  to 
saying  that  it  is  without  certain  others.  Hence  it  follows 
that  an  alternative  or  disjunctive  affirmative  can  be  broken 
up  into  a  number  of  independent  negatives.  This  of  course  is 
in  no  way  peculiar  to  our  system;  for  every  one  knows  that 
the  proposition  'All  X  is  either  Y  or  Z'  may  be  phrased 
'no  X  is  (neither  Y  nor  Z) '.  What  is  characteristic  of  this 
symbolic  Logic  is  the  symmetry  and  generality  with  which 
this  procedure  is  carried  out  all  through. 

Now  look  at  this  symbolically.  What  we  have  to  do  is  to 
break  up  the  given  statement  into  a  series  of  separate  state- 
ments each  expressing  that  such  and  such  a  combination  =  0. 
There  are  a  variety  of  ways  of  doing  this.  Perhaps  one  of 
the  most  methodical  is  the  following : — Suppose  we  had  the 
very  simple  statement  x  =  y  we  should  (as  was  formerly 
pointed  out)  throw  this  into  the  two  negations  x  (1  —  y)  =  0, 
y  (1  —  x)  =  0.  Now  the  same  holds  true  for  aggregates  of 
class  terms  as  well  as  for  simple  ones,  for  such  aggregation 
does  not  destroy  or  in  any  way  affect  their  class  character- 
istics. Hence  the  equation  w  —  xyz  +  xy  +  xyz,  may  be 
fully  expressed  negatively  by  the  two 

w  (xyz  +  xy  +  xyz)  =  0 
w  (1  —  xyz  —  xy  —  xyz)  =  0 

The  upper  of  these  is  already  in  the  form  of  a  sum  of  ne- 
gations, and  therefore  breaks  up  at  once  into  three  separate 
negations.  The  lower  as  it  stands  has  one  positive  and  three 
negative  terms,  but  may  be  easily  put  into  a  form  composed 
of  positive  terms  only.  For  the  three  negative  terms  are 
collectively  a  part  of  'all',  or  unity;  hence  if  unity  be  de- 
veloped in  respect  of  x,  y,  z,  some  of  the  eight  elements 
thus  resulting  will  be  neutralized  by  these  three  negative 


x.]  Logical  statements  or  equations.  231 

terms,  and  none  but  positive  ones  will  remain.  The  result 
is  then 

w  (xyz  +  xyz  +  xyz  +  xyz)  =  0.         ,.. 

When  this  is  added  to  the  similar  result  in  the  former 
equation  (those  three,  by  the  resolution  of  xy  into  xyz,  xyz, 
yield  four  ultimate  terms)  we  have  the  eight  following  ele- 
mentary negations: — 

wxyz  =  0    wxyz  =  0 

wxyz  =  0    wxyz  =  0 

wxyz  =  0    wxyz  =  0 

wayz  =  Q    wxyz  =  Q. 

I  shall  go  more  fully  hereafter  into  the  explanation  of 
these  eight  denials,  that  is,  into  the  various  verbal  forms  in 
which  their  joint  force  may  be  expressed.  But  the  reader 
should  understand  at  once  that  these  eight  denials  contain 
amongst  them  every  particle  of  information  yielded  by  the 
original  statement,  or  in  any  way  deducible  from  it. 

II.  Now  consider  the  case  of  implicit  equations,  by 
which  we  understand  those  in  which  we  do  not  find  a  single 
term  standing  by  itself  on  one  side,  and  declared  equal  to  a 
certain  group  of  terms  on  the  other  side.  The  following  will 
serve  as  a  simple  illustration  of  what  is  meant, 

xy  +  xz  =  xy  +  yz. 

A  very  little  observation  will  show  that  the  two  classes  in 
question  can  only  be  made  equal  to  one  another  upon  the 
conditions  expressed  by  xyz  =  0,  xyz  =  0.  On  any  other 
supposition  it  would  be  equivalent  to  the  declaration  of  the 
identity  of  the  money  income  with  the  acreage  or  family. 
This  is  more  obvious  on  subdividing  the  terms  on  each  side, 
when  they  stand 

xyz  +  xyz  +  xyz  +  xyz  =  xyz  +  xyz  +  xyz  +  xyz 
or  xyz  =  xyz,  which  of  course,  as  already  described,  demands 


232  Logical  statements  or  equations.  [CHAP. 

the  destruction  of  each  of  these  two  classes.  Hence  the  full 
interpretation  of  the  given  statement,  in  so  far  as  analysis  is 
concerned,  is  given  by  these  two  elements,  • 

xyz  =  01 

xy~z  —  OJ 

III.  In  the  two  classes  of  cases  hitherto  discussed,  all  the 
terms  entered  definitely  into  the  equations  or  propositions 
which  involved  them.  We  must  now  discuss  the  case  in 
which  one  or  more  of  the  terms  are  affected  by  the  indefinite 
sign  $  .  Begin  with  the  simplest  of  cases,  in  which  a  definite 
class  is  equated  to  an  indefinite  one,  for  instance 


This  form  was  examined  in  Chap.  vn.  We  showed  that 
it  is,  with  reserves  and  explanations,  the  best  accurate 
symbolic  equivalent  for  the  somewhat  ambiguous  'all  w  is  xy"1 
of  ordinary  Logic,  viz.  for  a  form  of  the  ordinary  Universal 
Affirmative.  We  also  considered  its  negative  form  in  the 
same  chapter,  but  we  must  now  compare  it  somewhat  more 
fully  with  the  definite  statements  above  considered.  In 
those  cases  what  we  did  was  to  exactly  identify  one  class 
group  with  another,  which  gave  rise  to  two  negations  :  for  we 
could  deny  of  each  group  that  it  had  any  members  outside 
the  other.  In  the  present  case  we  merely  say  more  vaguely 
that  one  group  is  at  most  contained  somewhere  within 
the  other,  which  only  gives  rise  to  the  single  denial  that  the 
definite  group  has  members  outside  the  extreme  limits  of  the 
indefinite  one.  Hence  all  that  can  be  elicited  from  such  a 
form  as  the  one  now  before  us  is, 

w(\  —  xy}  =  0. 

For  ay  is  the  extreme  limit  of  the  indefinite  class  $xy, 
when  $  becomes  =  1.  Hence  we  can  assert  unconditionally  no 
more  than  that  there  can  be  no  w  which  lies  outside  xy.  Of 
course,  if  we  like  to  do  so,  we  can  break  this  up  into  the 


x.]  Logical  statements  or  equations.  233 

constituent  members  of  which  1—  xy  is  composed,  viz. 
xy  +  xy  +  xy.  Then  the  equation  resolves  itself  into 
the  three  denials  given  by 

wxy  =  0  ] 

wxy  =  0  I  . 

ivxy  =  0  ] 

Now  take  a  somewhat  less  simple  example  involving 
indefinite  terms.  Suppose  we  have 

w  =  xyz  +  xy  +  ^xyz. 

First  as  regards  its  significance.  This  is  not,  like  the 
examples  we  began  with,  the  identification  of  two  class  groups 
with  one  another,  for  the  term  §xyz  comes  in  to  prevent  such 
identification.  It  cannot  therefore  be  regarded  as  expressive 
of  a  definition  or  description  of  w.  What  exactly  it  tells  us 
is  this  : — That  w  certainly  comprises  the  whole  of  the  two 
classes  xyz  +  xy  and  that  it  may  or  may  not  take  in  the 
class  xyz.  The  indeterminate  sign  therefore  is  a  sort  of 
"look  out"  to  us  to  be  prepared  for  individuals  from  the  class 
so  affected.  The  whole  of  the  class  may  be  wanted  ;  or,  if  it 
be  subdivided,  a  part  of  it  only,  or  possibly  none  at  all  may 
be  wanted.  This  is  left  altogether  indeterminate. 

It  is  clear  therefore  that  we  cannot  here  make  quite  such 
a  simple  double  negation  as  we  did  in  the  former  cases. 
What  we  have  to  do  instead  is  to  take  account  of  one  limit  of 
$  (viz.  1)  in  one  denial,  and  of  the  other  limit  (viz.  0)  in 
the  other  denial. 

We  may  say  with  certainty  that  there  is  no  w  which  lies 
outside  xyz  +  xy  +  xyz,  for  this  represents  the  extreme  limit 
of  the  admissible  indefiniteness ;  and  we  may  say  with 
similar  certainty  that  there  is  no  xyz  4-  xy  which  lies  outside 
w,  for  this  represents  the  extreme  limit  of  the  indefiniteness 
in  the  opposite  direction.  These  two  statements  yield  us 
a  pair  of  negations  which  do  not  quite  so  accurately  balance 


234  Logical  statements  or  equations.  [CHAP. 

one  another  as  was  the  case  when  we  were  concerned  with 
definite  terms  only,  for  one  is  less  extensive  than  the 
other.  Put  into  symbols  they  stand, 

w  (1  —  xyz  —  xy  —  xyz)  =  0) 
w  (xyz  +  xy)  =  0. 
We  might  then  proceed,  by  expanding  1  in  terms  of  x,  y,  and  z, 
to  convert  the  former  into  positive  terms  only,  and  should 
thus  be  finally  left  with  a  string  of  separate  negations  as 
in  the  former  cases  ;  the  only  distinction  being  that  owing  to 
the  occurrence  of  the  §  term  we  get  fewer  of  these  uncon- 
ditional negations  than  we  should  otherwise  obtain,  and 
therefore  our  materials  of  information  are  less  abundant. 

The  difference  thus  marked  in  the  symbols  is  equally 
noticeable  in  the  verbal  expression  :  that  is,  as  regards  our 
powers  of  conversion  and  contraposition  where  these  indeter- 
minate terms  occur.  What  we  ought  to  say  is  on  the  one 
hand,  'All  w  is  made  up  of  xyz,  xy,  and  (possibly)  xyz\  and 
on  the  other,  'All  xyz  and  all  xy  are  w\  What  we  may 
be  tempted  to  say,  however,  is  'All  w  is  made  up  of  xyz,  xy, 
and  some  xyz\  thus  omitting  the  full  indefiniteness  of  $xyz, 
or  introducing  confusion  and  ambiguity  by  this  word  some. 

Inasmuch  as  it  is  always  well  to  examine  limiting  cases, 
since  principles  so  often  lurk  concealed  in  such  holes  and 
corners,  it  will  be  well  to  see  what  these  superior  and 
inferior  limits  of  negation  become  when  we  have  none 
but  indefinite  terms  on  one  side.  Recur  to  the  example 


The  limit  of  $  in  one  direction  is  1  ;  thus  giving  us  the 
negation  w(l  —xy)  =  0,  viz.  that  'No  w  can  lie  outside  xy\ 
But  the  limit  on  the  other  side  is  0.  In  this  case  the  whole 
of  the  right  side  of  the  equation  vanishes,  and  we  can  make 
no  denial  by  means  of  this  inferior  limit  ;  or  rather,  in  formal 
strictness,  such  denial  assumes  the  form  'No  Oxy  lies  outside  w\ 


x.]  Logical  statements  or  equations.  235 

which  tells  us  nothing  whatever.  "We  are  thus  reminded 
again  of  the  distinction  between  this  really  indefinite  factor  §, 
and  both  the  some,  and  the  undistributed  predicate,  of  ordinary 
logic.  These  latter  exclude  the  value  0,  therefore  we  can 
always  make  something  out  of  the  statement  'All  w  is  xy'  in 
both  directions.  In  one  direction  the  result  agrees  with  our 
symbolic  expression  w  (1  —xy}  =  Q,  viz.  'No  w  is  not-ory'.  In 
the  other  it  is  generally  stated  positively,  in  the  form  '  Some 
(i.  e.  not  none)  xy  is  w\  The  validity  of  such  conversion  has 
been  already  discussed  in  a  former  chapter. 

We  will  now  look  at  a  more  general  method  for  ex- 
amining the  significance  of  any  logical  statement.  Here, 
as  in  every  other  case,  I  am  more  concerned  to  discuss 
the  question  in  a  way  calculated  to  throw  light  upon  the 
actual  logical  meaning  of  the  processes  we  perform,  than 
merely  to  bring  forward  convenient  or  powerful  symbolic 
devices  for  reaching  our  conclusions. 

Suppose  then  that  we  have  any  logical  equation  whatever 
involving  the  class  terms  x,  y,  z,  &c.  anyhow  combined.  It  is 
assumed  that  what  we  want  to  do  is  to  examine  the  full 
significance  of  this  equation,  that  is,  to  resolve  it  into  all  the 
elementary  denials  which  can  be  extracted  from  it. 

This  process  of  resolution  of  an  equation  into  its  elemen- 
tary denials  is,  as  already  remarked,  a  work  of  Analysis. 
What  can  be  done  afterwards  from  these  results  by  way 
of  Synthesis,  that  is,  by  putting  them  together  into  the  form 
of  affirmative  assertions,  will  have  to  be  considered  further  on. 

Perform  the  following  processes  upon  the  equation  : — 

1.  Bring  all  the  terms  ever  to  one  side,  so  as  to  reduce 
it  to  the  form /(#,  y,  z,...}=  0. 

2.  Develop  every  one  of  these  terms  into  all  the  sub- 
divisions attainable  by  taking  all  these  class  terms  into  account. 

3.  Equate  separately  to   zero   every  class  term   which 


236  Logical  statements  or  equations.  [CHAP. 

finally  remains  after  the  development ;  omitting  any  that 
may  be  affected  by  the  symbol  $,  for  of  these  nothing  can 
be  made. 

(1)  With  regard  to   the  first  process  hardly  anything 
need  be  said.     It  is  best  to  adopt  it  in  order  to  prevent 
confusion  by  the  same  terms  appearing  on  both  sides  of  the 
equation. 

(2)  One  or  two  points  seem  to  deserve  notice  in  respect 
to  this  second  step.    For  one  thing  it  must  be  observed  that 
none  but  combinations  of  xyz...  can  possibly  occur  in  our 
result.    That  is,  every  term  which  could  occur  in  the  original 
equation  will  resolve  itself  into  such   combinations.     For 
instance   no  numerical   factor    can    appear    there.     If    our 
original   equation   had   been   xy  +  ~xy  =  \    we   should   write 
it  xy  +  xy  —  1  =  0.     Now  since  unity  is  a  logical  term,  like 
any  other,  it  must  equally  undergo  expansion  into  the  elements 
xy  +  xy  -f  xy  +  xy.     Hence. the  final  result  of  the  equation  is 
xy  +  xy  =  0.     If    our    equations    or    statements    had  been 
pi'operly  drawn  out  at  first,  (and  we  must  in  fairness  assume 
so  much  as  this),  they  could  contain  nothing  but  1  and  other 
class   terms.     Consequently,   after  development,   none    but 
logical  class  terms  can  be  found  in  them. 

But  though  nothing  else  than  these  logical  class  terms 
can  be  found  in  our  equation  after  it  has  thus  undergone 
development,  it  does  not  follow  that  all  our  possible  class 
terms  will  be  represented  in  it.  On  the  contrary  one  or  more 
terms  must  be  missing  from  it,  as  otherwise  we  should  be 
landed  in  a  direct  contradiction  in  terms. 

(3)  The  reason  why  some  of  the  possible  terms  must 
thus  disappear  is  connected  with  the  grounds  of  this  third 
process,  and  has  been  already  adverted  to  once  or  twice.     All 
the  terms,  as  finally  arranged,  being  mutually  exclusive,  it  is 
impossible  for  any  one  of  them  to  cancel  another.     Conse- 


x.]  Logical  statements  or  equations.  237 

quently  when  a  group  of  them  is  equated  to  zero  this 
can  only  be  brought  about  by  each  separate  term  being  equal 
to  zero,  just  as  when  in  algebra  we  get  the  sum  of  a  number 
of  squares  =  0.  But  since  our  alternatives  are  collectively 
exhaustive  as  well  as  mutually  exclusive,  it  is  a  contradiction 
in  terms  to  suppose  them  all  to  vanish: — this,  it  will  be 
noticed,  being  our  generalized  form  corresponding  to  the 
so-called  Law  of  Excluded  Middle. 

Suppose  for  instance,  just  for  illustration,  that  we  write 
down  such  a  form  as  this, 

Axy  +  Bxy  +  Cxy  +  Dxy  =*  0, 

one  or  more  of  the  four  factors  A,  B,  C,  D,  must  be  supposed 
=  0,  in  order  to  avoid  contradiction.  Suppose  that  B  and  C 
thus  vanish,  whilst  A  and  D  do  not.  We  then  have 

Axy  +  Dxy  =  0. 

Since  it  is  impossible  for  these  terms  to  neutralize  one 
another,  and  by  supposition  A  and  D  do-  not  =  0,  the  other, 
,or  logical  class  terms,  must  vanish.  That  is  we  conclude 

^/  =  0{ 

xy  =  Oj  ' 

these  ultimate  denials  containing,  as  before,  the  full 
information  yielded  by  the  original  statement. 

It  may  be  asked  here,  but  what  if  all  the  four  factors 
A,  B,  C,  D,  above,  had  vanished:  what  cotdd  we  then 
conclude  ?  The  answer  is  that  in  that  case  nothing  whatever 
can  be  concluded.  The  vanishing  of  any  term  from  our 
equation  is  an  indication  that  our  data  give  us  no  information 
about  it,  and  the  vanishing  of  every  term  is  an  indication 
that  no  information  whatever  is  obtainable.  As  every  mathe- 
matician knows,  this  is  the  usual  resource  of  an  equation 
under  the  circumstances.  When  there  is  no  information 
yielded  by  the  data,  they  will  not  unfrequently  save  them- 
selves from  misstatement  by  just  reducing  to  the  unmeaning 


238  Logical  statements  or  equations.  [CHAP. 

form  0  =  0.  Of  course  we  could  not  begin  by  writing  down 
such  a  form  as  this,  in  which  all  the  terms  should  vanish ;  but 
it  might  quite  well  happen  (as  we  shall  see  when  we  come  to 
the  study  of  Elimination)  that  we  should  deduce  such  an 
equation  as  an  inference.  We  must  then  take  its  collapse 
and  disappearance  as  an  intimation  that  we  were  trying 
to  extort  from  it  information  which  it  was  not  in  its  power  to 
give  us. 

One  case  still  remains  for  notice.  We  have  so  far  sup- 
posed that  the  factors  (A,  B,  C,  D,  &c.)  of  our  class  terms 
were  either  0  or  1,  that  is  that  they  either  vanish  entirely  or 
present  themselves  simply  and  singly.  But  there  is,  as  we 
know,  another  recognized  class  factor,  viz.  $ ;  what  is  to  be 
made  of  terms  which  happen  to  be  thus  affected  ?  The 
answer  is  that  we  can  make  nothing  of  them  when  they 
thus  corne  out  as  members  of  a  series  which  is  collectively 
made  =  0.  For  instance  if  we  met  with  such  an  expression 
asary-f  $cy  =  0,  the  indefinite  term  must  just  be  let  alone, 
as  completely  as  if  it  had  vanished  by  having  the  multiplier  0. 
We  know  that  the  whole  expression  $xy  must  disappear,  but 
as  this  may  be  owing  to  $  being  =  0,  we  cannot  assign  the 
cause  to  the  other  term  xy.  We  can  therefore  only  be  sure 
that  the  term  xy  vanishes,  in  other  words  can  only  draw  the 
one  denial 

xy  =  0. 

The  point  then  that  we  have  now  reached  is  this.  When 
any  significant  logical  equation  is  given  to  us,  drawn  up  in 
accordance  with  the  various  rules  which  we  have  laid  down, 
we  can  resolve  it  into  a  series  of  separate  denials,  and  such 
denials  contain  within  'themselves  the  sum-total  of  informa- 
tion which  the  equation  can  furnish.  That  original  equation 
may  have  been  given  to  us  in  a  categorical,  hypothetical,  or 
disjunctive  proposition.  Such  differences  as  these  are  mere 


x.]  Logical  statements  or  equations.  239 

accidents  of  colloquial  form,  which  disappear  in  the  process 
of  accurate  and  generalized  symbolic  statement.  In  every 
case  alike  we  ground  at  last  upon  a  certain  number,  more  or 
less,  of  what  may  thus  be  called  elementary  denials,  such  as 
xyz  =  0,  xyz  =  0,  &c. 

What  further  can  be  done  with  these  denials  in  the  way  of 
drawing  what  would  commonly  be  called  affirmative  proposi- 
tions: that  is,  in  what  various  ways  the  knowledge  they 
yield  us  can  be  again  built  up  into  new  forms,  will  have  to  be 
discussed  in  another  chapter. 


CHAPTER  XI. 

LOGICAL  STATEMENTS  OR  EQUATIONS  (continued). 

HAVING  thus  explained  the  meaning  and  interpretation  of  a 
single  logical  statement  or  equation,  we  must  now  go  on  to 
discuss  the  case  of  a  system  of  them.  Propositions  do  not 
generally  present  themselves  alone,  but  in  groups  of  two  or 
more,  and  we  have  already  had  repeated  opportunities  of 
examining  the  results  of  their  combination  in  simple  ex- 
amples. But  we  must  now  give  more  definite  consideration 
to  the  specific  question  whether  a  combination  of  equations 
differs  in  any  essential  way  from  a  single  equation ;  and,  if  it 
does,  what  is  the  nature,  the  ground,  and  the  limits  of  such 
difference? 

The  principal  misleading  influences  under  which  the 
reader  will  probably  lie  here  are  those  introduced  by  the 
associations  of  mathematics.  In  mathematics  a  combination 
of  equations  differs  from  a  single  equation  by  what  may 
almost  be  called  a  difference  of  kind  rather  than  one  of 
degree  only.  Generally  speaking,  a  single  equation  which 
involves  two  variables,  x  and  y  for  instance,  admits  of  an 
infinite  number  of  solutions;  and  the  answer  is  so  far  left 
entirely  indeterminate.  When  we  introduce  two  equations, 


XI.]  Logical  statements  or  equations.  241 

so  serious  a  restriction  is  introduced  that  we  are  at  once  tied 
down  to  a  single  and  determinate  value  for  x  and  y,  if  the 
equation  were  of  the  first  degree.  If  we  try  to  combine  to- 
gether more  than  two  of  such  equations,  we  should  find  them, 
generally  speaking,  in  direct  conflict  with  one  another.  The 
third  would  either  be  simply  deducible  from  the  other  two, 
or  irreconcileable  with  them. 

In  the  case  of  Logical  equations  however  there  is  nothing 
resembling  all  this.  There  is  no  intrinsic  or  necessary 
difference  between  the  nature  and  amount  of  information 
yielded  by  one,  and  that  which  we  obtain  from  two.  Given 
one  equation,  the  addition  of  a  second  to  it,  involving  the 
same  terms,  will  no  doubt,  generally  speaking,  add  to  our 
information,  but  it  does  not  do  so  by  the  marked  and  striking 
steps  to  which  we  are  accustomed  in  mathematics.  There  is 
nothing  here  like  the  precise  assignment  of  a  single  point  by 
the  intersection  of  two  lines;  it  is  more  like  the  contraction 
of  a  circle  into  one  of  a  smaller  radius.  We  are  still  referred 
to  a  class  of  some  kind,  whether  we  are  supplied  with  one 
equation  or  with  many;  but  in  the  latter  case  the  class  is 
narrowed  by  the  excision,  probably,  of  a  number  of  its  various 
subdivisions. 

If  the  reader  recurs  to  that  negative  interpretation  of 
a  proposition  which  we  have  had  so  often  to  insist  upon,  he 
will  see  at  once  why  this  is  so.  Start  with  one  equation: 
this  will  yield  us  a  certain  number  of  excisions  or  destruc- 
tions of  possible  classes.  How  many  it  will  thus  destroy  is 
of  course  dependent  upon  various  considerations,  such  as  the 
relative  magnitude  of  the  classes  with  which  it  deals.  Some 
however  it  must  certainly  destroy,  or  it  would  be  without 
any  significance  or  value.  Now  add  on  another  equation. 
This  will  similarly  proceed  to  make  some  further  such 
clearances.  Now  unless  the  second  be  a  mere  repetition  of 

V.  L.  16 


242  Logical  statements  or  equations.  [CHAP. 

the  first,  or  of  some  part  of  the  first,  it  must  follow  that  the 
second  will  make  some  clearances  amongst  classes  which  had 
been  left  surviving  by  the  first.  It  will  in  fact  add  to  our 
materials  of  information.  But  this  does  not  represent  any 
intrinsic  superiority  in  the  information  yielded  by  the  two 
over  that  yielded  by  one;  for  it  must  be  remembered  that  the 
sum-total  of  the  information  might  equally  well  have  been 
conveyed  by  one  singly. 

It  is  as  if  a  man  were  to  write  one  letter,  and  follow  it  up 
by  another  which  adds  further  details;  the  two  tell  us  more 
than  either  did  separately,  but  there  is  certainly  nothing  to 
prevent  him  putting  all  that  he  said,  or  even  more  than  that, 
into  a  single  letter  if  he  had  chosen  to  do  so.  We  could 
clearly  lay  down  no  definite  rule  about  two  such  letters 
giving" us  more  information  or  any  new  kind  or  degree  of 
information,  than  a  single  one  would. 

If  any  doubt  is  felt  on  this  point,  an  appeal,  symbolically 
and  diagrammatically,  to  any  simple  example  will  serve  to 
make  it  quite  plain.  Take  the  following  examples; 

=  $(xy  +  xz) (a) 

(w  =  %  (xyz  +  xz). (/3) 

They  would  be  naturally  expressed  in  words,  by  saying, 

{All  w  is  either  cc  and  y,  or,  if  not  x,  then  z. 
All  w  is  either  x,  y,  and  z,  or  neither  x  nor  z. 

I.  Begin  by  looking  at  the  affirmative  side  of  these  two 
statements  and  their  combination-  together. 


XI.]  Logical  statements  or  equations.  243 

Equation  (a)  asserts  that  the  whole  of  the  class  w  is  con- 
fined to  a  portion,  (a  truly  indefinite  portion)  of  the  two 
compartments  ocy  and  xz.  Similarly  equation  (ft)  confines 
the  members  of  this  same  class  w  to  the  compartments  xyz 
and  ~xz.  It  is  clear  therefore  that  the  two  equations  when 
taken  in  combination  confine  the  class  w  to  the  one  sub- 
division common  to  these  two  assignments,  viz.  to  xyz. 
To  put  it  into  ordinary  language,  we  are  told  that  'all  w 
is  xyz\ 

In  this  case,  as  it  happens,  the  result  of  thus  combining 
two  distinct  determinations  of  w  has  been  its  restriction  to  a, 
single  class,  which  represents  the  most  definite  such  logical 
determination  we  can  obtain.  Of  course  this  might  have 
been  otherwise;  we  might  have  had  w  assigned,  in  a  dis- 
junctive form  to  more  than  one  class.  No  rule  can  possibly 
be  laid  down  here  as  to  the  limits  of  such  ultimate  determi- 
nation. 

The  reader  will  observe  that  in  this  case  the  class  w  was 
originally  referred  to  two  different  groups  of  sub-classes 
which  partially  overlap  one  another,  thus  restricting  w  to 
this  common  part.  It  will  readily  be  seen  that  this  must 
represent  the  most  usual  case.  For  failing  this,  what  else 
could  we  have?  Either  the  two  groups  to  which  w  is  re- 
ferred must  be  entirely  distinct  from  one  another,  which  is 
tantamount  to  saying  that  there  is  no  w  at  all;  or  the  one 
group  must  be  entirely  contained  within  the  other,  in  which 
case  the  narrower  determination  completely  supersedes  the 
broader. 

Of  course  when,  as  here,  we  have  a  class  w  thus  standing 
by  itself,  on  one  side,  and  on  the  other  side  a  group  of  classes 
which  determines  it  with  more  or  less  definitencss,  there  is  a 
much  shorter  method  of  procedure  than  that  given  above. 
All  we  have  to  do  is  to  'multiply'  the  two  determinations 

16—2 


244  Logical  statements  or  equations.  [CHAP. 

together,  when  the  common  elements  will  stand  out  as  the 
only  survivors.     Thus, 

w  =  $  (xy  +  xz}  (xyz  +  x~z) 


for  the  other  three  terms  of  the  product  disappear,  owing  to 
the  general  symbolic  rule  xx  =  0,  zz  =  0. 

Had  the  two  groups  been  identical,  this  product  would 
have  simply  repeated  either  of  them.  Had  they  been 
entirely  distinct,  the  result  would  have  been  exhibited  in  the 
shape  w  =  0. 

II.  The  same  results  come  out  equally  distinctly  under  the 
negative  interpretation  of  our  statements.  In  fact  this  is  the 
simplest  and  most  general  way  of  regarding  them  ;  for  explicit 
equations  of  the  kind  of  which  our  present  example  is  an  in- 
stance are  but  one  class  of  logical  equations,  whereas  we  have 
shown  that  all  logical  equations  without  exception  are  resolv- 
able into  a  series  of  distinct  negations.  What  we  ask,  under 
this  interpretation,  is  what  subdivisions  does  each  equation 
blot  out,  instead  of  asking  what  classes  it  suffers  to  remain  in 
existence. 

By  the  methods  of  treatment  described  in  the  last 
chapter  we  should  resolve  each  equation  into  all  the  ultimate 
denials  which  it  involves,  and  which  together  constitute  its 
effective  meaning.  They  would  then  stand  as  follows  ;  — 

{w  (xyz  +  xyz  +  xyz  +  xyz)  =  0 
w  (xyz  +  xyz  +  xyz  +  xyz  +  xyz}  =  0. 

Now  denial,  as  we  have  seen,  is  unconditional  and  final. 
All  therefore  that  we  have  to  do  is  to  add  up  these 
separate  elements,  lay  aside  those  which  merely  repeat  what 
has  been  already  denied,  and  see  what  number  of  classes 
they  succeed  in  accounting  for  amongst  them.  In  the  case 
before  us,  two  of  the  denials  are  twice  repeated,  thus  in- 


XI.]  Logical  statements  or  equations.  245 

dicating  that,  to  that  extent,  the  given  equations  were  not 
altogether  independent  of  one  another.  Hence  the  nine  ele- 
mentary negatives  we  have  obtained  are  reduced  to  seven, 
leaving  one  and  only  one  surviving,  viz.  wxyz.  If  this  be 
put  into  words  it  may  be  phrased  thus,  'The  only  w  that  can 
exist  under  the  given  conditions  is  the  w  that  is  xyz\  This 
is,  as  we  know,  a  true  interpretation  of  the  familiar  Uni- 
versal Affirmative  which  was  obtained  by  the  other  mode 
of  treatment,  'All  w  is  xyz']  so  that  the  two  views  lead  us  to 
the  same  conclusion. 

It  appears  therefore  that  the  most  which  a  second  equa- 
tion can  do  is  to  supplement  the  information  afforded  by  the 
first;  at  least  in  instances  of  the  kind  which  we  have  ex- 
amined, and  which  may  be  taken  as  fair  samples  of  those 
which  we  meet  in  Logic.  As  before  remarked,  there  may 
not  even  be  this  supplementary  information  afforded.  If 
the  group  of  compartments  to  which  the  second  equation 
refers  the  class  which  we  are  seeking  to  determine,  be  a 
wider  one  than  that  assigned  by  the  first,  then  it  tells 
us  nothing  new.  Thus  w  =  $  (1  —  xyz)  adds  nothing  what- 
ever to  the  statement  w  =  -J}  (1  —  xy) ;  since  (1  —  xy)  is  con- 
tained in  the  class  (1  —  xyz}  and  is  therefore  a  narrower 
determination  than  that  which  is  offered  to  supplement  and 
restrict  it. 

Conversely  when  the  new  assignment  is  a  narrower 
group  than  the  old  we  do  not  strictly  speaking  supplement 
our  information,  we  rather  supersede  entirely  the  old  assign- 
ment. Thus  for  instance  if  w  =  §  (1  —  xyz}  had  been  given 
to  us  first,  this  would  be  entirely  superseded  by  the  equation 
w  =  $(l-xy). 

Hence  the  natural  and  appropriate  instances  of  combina- 
tion of  equations,  of  this  explicit  character,  will  be  when  the 
class  determination  of  the  one  partially  overlaps  that  of  the 


246  Logical  statements  or  equations.  [CHAP. 

other.  Each  then  contributes  something  to  the  other,  that 
is,  each  in  part  curtails  the  limits  which  the  other  had 
assigned.  I  recall  attention  to  this  point  because  it  is  so 
strongly  characteristic  of  that  class-view  or  denotation- view 
of  the  import  of  terms  which  necessarily  pervades  this 
account  of  Logic.  In  common  Logic  when  we  refer  to  xy, 
we  as  often  as  not, — probably  much  oftener, — think  of 
x  and  y  merely  as  attributes  successively  imposed  upon  an 
object.  That  is,  we  think  of  them  in  their  connotation;  and, 
so  thinking  of  them,  we  make  no  reference  to  anything  but 
the  presence  of  such  attributes: — we  do  not  simultaneously 
impose  the  absence  of  these  same  attributes  upon  any  other 
objects.  We  simply  think  nothing  about  such  absence  in 
reference  to  any  other  objects.  But  when  x  and  y  are 
regarded  as  classes  we  cannot  but  observe  that  not-#  and 
not-y  are  themselves  just  as  much  classes  as  those  of  which 
they  are  the  contradictories.  To  say  therefore  that  a  thing  is 
xy  assigns  it  as  a  rule  to  two  overlapping  classes:  the  one 
assignment  cuts  off  the  class  xy,  and  the  other  cuts  off  xy, 
leaving  only  xy  out  of  the  whole  contents  of  x  and  y  together, 
viz.  xy  +  xy  +  xy. 

We  gather  then  that,  except  for  purposes  of  mere 
arrangement,  such  as  symmetry  or  brevity  or  clearness,  it 
is  a  matter  of  entire  indifference  in  how  many  propositions 
or  equations  'any  given  stock  of  logical  information  is 
conveyed.  The  full  significance  can  always  (unlike  the 
case  of  mathematical  equations)  be  conveyed  in  the  form  of 
a  single  equation  which  equates  to  zero  the  sum  of  a  number 
of  distinct  alternatives. 

For  instance  in  the  example  towards  the  commencement 
of  this  chapter,  we  saw  that  all  which  the  two  equations 
had  to  say  could  be  completely  said  by  one.  We  might 
equally  take  a  step  in  the  opposite  direction  by  increasing 


XL]  Logical  statements  or  equations.  217 

their  number,  that  is,  by  breaking  them  up  into  smaller 
contingents.  The  two,  as  originally  given  to  us1,  stood 
thus : — 

1  =  w  (xy  +  xz) 
\w  =  w  (xyz  +  xz) 

Now  develop  each  side  of  the  upper  one  in  respect  of  x, 
or,  in  more  familiar  words,  break  each  side  up  into  its  x  and 
its  not-aj  parts.  The  two  sides  of  the  resultant  equations 
must  still  be  equal  after  this  subdivision  ;  that  is,  the  x  part 
and  the  not-a;  part.  This  follows  from  the  fact  that  our 
so-called  equation  is  really  the  identity  of  a  group  of  in- 
dividuals when  referred  to  under  two  different  names  or 
groups  of  names.  Hence  the  same  identity  persists  when 
the  group  is  split  into  two  distinct  sections,  so  that  the 
a;-parts  of  the  equation  and  the  not-a;  parts  taken  separately 
will  each  still  hold  good. 

We  may  therefore  substitute  for  the  single  equation 
w  =  w  (xy  +  xz),  the  pair 

(wx  =  wxy 
[wx  =  wxz. 

And  for  the  single  one,  ^u  =  w  (xyz  +  xz),  the  pair 

(wx  =  wxyz 


The  combined  effect  of  these  four  being  precisely  equivalent 
in  every  way  to  that  of  the  original  two,  or  to  the  one  into 
which  we  saw  we  could  compress  them. 

If  we  had  chosen  to  make  a  somewhat  different  arrange- 
ment we  might  have  broken  up  the  two  sides  in  respect 
of  y  instead  of  in  respect  of  x.  In  that  case,  as  the  reader 

1  For  variety,  and  to  remind  the      occasionally  adopt  the  form  w=w£ 
reader  of  their  exact  equivalence,  I       ead  pf  JJK  —  %  £ 


248  Logical  statements  or  equations.  [CHAP. 

will   readily  see,  we  should  have  got  the  following  group 
instead ; — 

{wy  =  wy(x  +  xz} 
wy  =  wyxz. 
(wy  —  wy  (xz  -f  xz) 
\wy  =  wyxz. 

(Attention  may  be  directed  here  to  the  second  and 
fourth  of  these  equations.  They  refer  wy  to  two  contra- 
dictory classes,  viz.  to  one  that  is  z  and  to  one  that  is  not-z. 
This  is,  as  we  now  know,  merely  their  way  of  reminding  us 
that  there  is  no  such  class  as  wy,  or  in  other  words,  of 
saying  that  'all  w  is  y'.} 

From .  what  has  been  said  about  the  interpretation  of 
equations  it  follows  that  logical  equations  have  a  sort  of  self- 
righting  power  about  them.  In  this  they  are  somewhat 
distinct  from  mere  class  expressions,  the  correction  of  which, 
when  we  have  reason  to  believe  them  badly  expressed,  can 
only  be  carried  out  by  our  guessing  what  was  likely  to  have 
been  meant,  and  then  inserting  our  conjectural  correction. 
Thus  oc  +  y,  standing  by  itself,  might  leave  a  doubt  whether 
it  was  meant  for  '  x  or  y  or  both'  (i.e.  x  +xy)  or  whether  it 
was  merely  so  put  because  x  and  y  were  known  to  be  inde- 
pendent, and  that  this  was  consequently  briefer  than  to  write 
anj  +  xy. 

Now  compare  the  equation  x  +  y  =  z. 

We  see  at  once  that  xy  must  =  0  here,  as  otherwise  a 
simple  class  term  z  would  be  partly  identified  with  the 
double  term  2xy.  Hence  the  equation  may  be  written  in 
the  correct  form,  for  which  it  has  itself  supplied  the  con- 
dition : — 

xy  +  xy  =  z  (with  xy  =  0). 

So  again  in  the  case  ofw(x  +  y)  =  oc  —  y. 
When  analysed  this  leads  to  the  denials  wy  =  0,  wxy  =  0, 


XI.]  Logical  statements  or  equations.  249 

wxy  =  0.  Whence  we  see  that  y  must  =  xy,  so  that  the 
statement  ought  really  to  have  been  phrased 

wx  =  xy. 

It  is  then  intelligible  enough,  the  only  misleading  features 
having  been  the  addition  of  ivy  (in  that  form)  to  wx,  and  the 
apparent  introduction  of  a  substantive  negative  term  (y)  on 
one  side  when  both  the  terms  on  the  opposite  side  were 
positive.  These  difficulties  are  at  once  removed  by  the 
assurance  that  there  is  no  wy,  and  that  x  —  y  =  xy.  What  in 
fact  we  were  originally  offered  was  a  piece  of  very  bad  sym- 
bolic grammar ;  this  we  are  able  to  correct  by  the  conditions 
of  the  system,  and  so  can  express  the  statement  in  the  per- 
fectly unobjectionable  form,  wx  =  xy. 

The  above  remarks  become  of  some  symbolic  importance  in 

jg- 
the  interpretation  of  the  inverse  form  -™    We  gave  a  simple 

enough  explanation  of  it,  applicable  to  every  case  in  which  X 
und  Y  were  possible  class  expressions  in  a  correct  form.  But 

OC  ~~~  I/ 

this  explanation  will  not  cover  every  case.    For  instance 

cannot  be  read  off  in  any  such  simple  fashion  as  this.  But  if 
we  regard  it  as,  so  to  say,  a  piece  of  symbolic  bad  grammar, 
it  will  become  amenable  to  treatment.  We  know  that  it 
might  originate  from  w(x  +  y)  =  x  —  y;  that  is,  'If  w  combined 
with  x  +y  yields  x  —  y,  what  must  w  be'  ?  Then  we  have  an 
equation  which  can  be  repaired  and  reconstructed  like  one  of 
those  above  considered.  For  w(x  +  y)=-x  —  y,  after  resolution 
and  reconstruction  stands  (as  shown  on  the  last  page) 

wx  =  xy  with  xy  =  0.  ' ,'    *j-£.  K,^f 

What  the  expression  w  (x  +  y)  =  x  —  y  asks  us,  is,  to  find 
a  class  such  that  on  combination  with  x  +  y  it  shall  yield 
x  —  y.  It  was  a  foolish  question  to  ask  in  those  words, 
for  we  find  that  the  t/-part  of  w  (x+y}  contributes  nothing 


250  Logical  statements  or  equations.  [CH. 

(wy  being=0),  and  that  x  —  y  is  really  xy,  (xy  being  =  0).  So 
the  answer  is  that  w  =  xy  +  §  xy. 

3/  *™~  V 

Boole  would  not  have  hesitated  to  take  -  -  as  it  stands. 

x  +  y 

and  devefope  it  into  xy  —  xy  +  $xy.  So  phrased  it  has  no 
meaning,  for  we  cannot  deduct  xy  from  either  of  the  other 
classes.  Accordingly  he  has  to  introduce  the  rule  that  any 
term  tihus  affected  with  a  negative  factor  (or  indeed  any 
factor  but  J  and  $)  must  be  equated  to  zero,  as  we  do 
with  those  affected  with  the  factor  £.  We  then  find  that 

x  ~~  it 

•    =  xy  +  §  xy.     This  seems  to  me  to  be  rather  straining 

x  ~r  y 

the  use  of  our  symbols,  though  it  does  not  amount  to  real 

1    ^~   *7*  i---  7/ 

error.     Take  again  the  following  :  -  "„   This  when  deve- 

xy 


loped  yields  —  xy  +  ^xy  +  ^xy  +^xy.  This,  like  the  other 
forms  above,  will  submit  to  explanation,  but  it  is  certainly  very 
badly  expressed.  Since  \—x-*y  =  xy  —  xy,  what  we  are 
really  asking  for,  is  some  factor  which  will  reduce  xy  to  xy—xy. 
Some  class  term  z  is  wanted,  such  that  zxy  =  xy  —  xy.  Of 
course  there  can  be  no  such  class  term,  for  how  can  a  positive 
term,  like  xy,  be  converted  into  its  contradictory  xy,  or  into 
a  negative  like  (-  xy)  ?  So  the  statement  escapes  nonsense 
by  demanding  that  a-y  and  xy  shall  both  =  0,  and  then  z 
may  naturally  be  anything  whatever.  The  value  apparently 
deduced  for  z,  by  Boole's  symbolic  method  of  expansion,  is  in 
fact  quite  illusory  and  misleading.  It  stands  indeed  in  the 
form  $  xy  +  $  xy  ;  but,  {since  #y  =  0  and  xy  =  0,)  xy  +  xy  —  1, 
so  that  $  xy  +  $  xy  is  not,  (as  it  clearly  ought  not  to  be)  any 
determination  at  all  :  it  is  equivalent  to  $1,  viz.  it  is  abso- 
lutely indefinite. 

This  sort   of   symbolic  solecism,   as  we    may  term   it, 
commonly  takes  the  form  of  asking  two  questions  in  one, 


XL]  Logical  statements  or  equations.  251 

but  asking  them  in  terms  which  resemble  a  single  ques- 
tion. Thus  the  expression  -  -  yields  $xy  +  %xy.  Now 

x     y 

x  —  y  =  xy  —  xy,  so  that  what  -     -  asks  for  is  a  class  such  as 

x  —  y 

shall,  when  combined  with  xy  —  xy,  reduce  to  0.  But  we  can- 
not, as  pretended  or  suggested,  deduct  xy  from  xy.  Accord- 
ingly the  question  really  means  'Find  a  class  such  that  combi- 
nation with  either  xy  or  xy  shall  reduce  to  0'.  This  being 
what  we  meant,  the  (symbolically)  correct  grammatical  form 

would  have  been  — = — —  .     This  would  develope  at  once  into 
xy  +  xy 

$xy  +  $xy. 

It  may  be  noticed  that  these  awkward  expressions  will 
often  meet  us  in  the  solution  of  problems.  Thus  take  the 
statement  wx  =  wy  which  in  that  form  is  quite  irreproachable. 
If  asked  to  determine  w,  we  might  proceed  to  saywx—wy=Q, 

therefore  w  =  —     -  as  above  ;  and  then  solving  this  we  should 

i/ 

obtain  w  —  §  xy  +  $  xy.  The  awkwardness  here  of  course 
begins  at  the  step  wx  —  wy  =  0,  for  we  thus  use  the  form  of 
subtraction  or  subduction  upon  terms  which  do  not  formally 
merit  it,  though  we  know  that  materially,  that  is,  by  the  con- 
ditions of  the  data,  they  do  so.  A  less  questionable  plan 
would  have  been  to  have  broken  up  wx  =  wy  into  wxy  =  0, 
wxy  =  0,  which  would  lead  at  once  to  w  (xy  +  xy)  =  0  or 

w  =  — — =-  a  form  against  which  no  objection  whatever  could 
xy  +  xy 

be  raised. 

On  the  interpretation  of  Equations. 

There  are  few  points  in  the  Symbolic  Logic  about  which 
acquired  views  will  have  to  be  more  completely  abandoned 


252  Logical  statements  or  equations.  [CHAP. 

than  in  reference  to  the  interpretation  of  logical  equations. 
In  the  common  system  we  talk  of  the  solution  as  if  there  were 
but  one ;  in  fact  a  plurality  of  possible  answers  is  considered 
a  fatal  defect,  so  that  possible  syllogistic  figures  are  rejected 
on  this  ground  alone. 

On  the  symbolic  system  all  this  has,  at  first  sight,  to  be 
altered.  We  must  be  prepared  here  for  such  an  apparent 
variety  of  possible  answers  that  different  persons  might  draw 
conclusions  which  appear  to  have  no  connection  between 
them.  In  saying  this  it  is  not,  of  course,  implied  that  con- 
flicting answers  could  be  drawn,  but  rather  that  the  modes  of 
expression  are  so  various  that  the  same  answer  substantially 
can  assume  a  bewildering  variety  of  forms. 

This  distinction  rests  upon  two  grounds ;  firstly,  the  fact 
that  we  put  a  term  and  its  contradictory  (x  and  x)  on  exactly 
the  same  footing,  whereas  the  common  system  seeks  always 
to  express  itself  in  positive  terms,  putting  the  negation  into 
the  predicate.  Secondly,  there  is  the  obvious  difference  that 
whereas  but  two  or  three  terms  are  commonly  admitted  into 
the  former,  the  latter  is  prepared  to  welcome  any  number. 

For  instance,  take  the  familiar  syllogism,  'all  x  is  y ;  no 
z  is  y\  .'.  no  zisx'.  Here  it  would  be  said,  and  very  correctly 
from  the  appropriate  standpoint,  that  there  is  one  and  only  one 
conclusion  possible.  Now  look  at  it  symbolically :  We  write 
the  statements  in  the  form  <mj  =  0,  yz  =  0.  Therefore  the  full 
combination  of  the  two  may  be  written  aiy  +  yz  =  Qy  and  it 
rnay  be  represented  in  a  diagram  thus : 


y\ 

It  will  be  seen  at  once,  even  in  such  a  simple  case,  what 


XL]  Logical  statements  or  equations.  253 

a  variety  of  possible  solutions  are  here  open  to  us.  First  take 
the  complete  solutions.  These  fall  into  the  usual  distinction 
offered  by  the  positive  and  negative  interpretation  ;  that  is, 
according  as  we  enumerate  all  the  abolished  classes,  or  all  the 
possible  surviving  ones.  Thus,  xy  +  yz  =  0  expanded  into  its 
details  gives  four  terms  to  be  destroyed,  the  remaining  four 
being  equated  to  unity. 

(xyz  +  xy"z  +  xyz  4  xyz  =  0 
\xy~z  +  xy~z  +  xyz.-\-  xy~z  —  1. 

These  are  the  complete  alternative  answers  given  in  their 
fullest  details.  The  former  states,  with  negative  disjunction, 
that  there  is  nothing  which  falls  into  any  one  of  its  four 
classes  ;  the  latter,  with  affirmative  disjunction,  that  every- 
thing does  fall  into  one  or  other  of  its  four  classes. 

These  ultimate  elements  we  may  of  course  group  at  will, 
and  thus  obtain  various  simplifications  of  expression.  The 
former  we  know  will  stand  as  xy  +  yz  =  0,  the  latter  will 
stand  as  yz  +  xy=l.  They  then  state  respectively  that 
there  is  nothing  which  is  either  yz  or  xy,  and  that  everything 
is  either  yz  or  xy, 

These  are  the  complete  statements  of  the  information 
yielded  by  the  data  in  an  implicit  form.  Now  for  the  same 
or  a  part  of  the  same  complete  information  in  an  explicit 
form.  We  may  require  to  have  the  account  of  any  one  of 
the  six  terms  x,  x,  y,  y,  z,  z,  as  described  in  the  other  terms  ; 
thus 


y  =  x~z  +  %  ocz. 

and  so  on  with  the  remaining  terms. 

But  even  this  is  only  a  part  of  the  full  problem  before  us. 
Our  complete  scheme  comprises  two  further  modifications  on 


254  Logical  statements  or' equations.  [CHAP. 

anything  here  indicated.  For  we  may  want  to  determine 
not  merely  X  and  x,  y  and  y,  z  and  z,  but  any  possible 
combination  or  function  of  these ;  and  this  we  may  want  to 
determine  not  as  here  in  terms  of  all  the  remaining  elements, 
but  in  terms  of  any  selection  from  amongst  these,  after  elimi- 
nation of  the  remaining  elements.  These  extensions  will  be 
duly  discussed  in  their  proper  places. 

The  above  example  will  serve  to  shew  how  indefinite  is 
the  solution  of  a  logical  problem,  unless  some  further 
indications  are  given  as  to  the  kind  of  solution  desired.  The 
sum-total  of  the  facts  which  are  left  consistent  with  the 
data  must  necessarily  be  the  same  however  they  may  be 
expressed.  But  the  various  ways  of  expressing  those  facts, 
and  still  more  the  various  ways  of  expressing  selections  and 
combinations  of  them,  are  very  numerous.  Take,  for  instance, 
a  slightly  more  complicated  example,  such  as  that  indicated 
in  the  following  figure  : 


and  observe  in  what  a  variety  of  ways  the  unshaded  portion  may 
be  described.    The  figure  represents  the  results  of  the  data; — 
( All  wx  is  z  (  wxz  =  0 

<  All  we  IB  a;  or  y     viz.  1  wzxy  =  0 
(All  yz  is  w  or  aJ  [yzwx  =  0. 

One  way  of  course  is  to  say  that  the  surviving  classes  are 
all  which  are  not  thus  obliterated;  these  being  negatively 

1  —  xzw  —  xyzw  —  xyzw 
or,  slightly  grouped, 

1  —  axw  —  xz(yw  +  yw). 


xi.]  Logical  statements  or  equations.  255 

Or  again,  we  may  put  them  all  positively  thus, 

x  (wz  +  wz  +  w~z}  +  xz  (wy  +  wy}  +  xz 
or,  less  completely  positive,  but  briefer, 

x  (1  —  wz}  +  xz  (wy  +  wy}  +  xz 
or          x(l  —  wz) +x  {z  (wy +  wy)  +  z], 

each  of  these  symbolic  groupings  having  of  course  its  suitable 
verbal  description.  Thus  the  last  may  be  read  'All  x  except 
what  is  w  but  not  z ;  and  all  not-x,  provided  it  be  noi-z,  or,  if 
z,  then  both  or  neither  w  and  y\ 

The  general  nature  of  the  problem  thus  put  before  us  is 
easily  indicated.  Suppose  there  were  four  terms  involved; 
then  our  symbolic  apparatus  provides  24  or  16  compartments 
or  possibilities.  The  data  impose  material  limits  upon  these 
possibilities,  leaving  only  a  limited  number  of  actualities. 
That  is,  they  extinguish  a  certain  number  and  leave  only  the 
remainder  surviving.  In  this  case  out  of  the  16  original  possi- 
bilities 12- are  left  remaining.  The  full  result  then  of  the  data 
is  given  by  enumerating  completely  either  the  extinguished 
compartments  or  the  remaining  ones.  Either  of  these  enume- 
rations is  only  possible  in  one  way,  provided  we  do  it  in  detail. 
But  when  we  want  to  group  these  results,  for  more  con- 
venience, into  compendious  statements,  we  see  that  it  can  be 
done  in  a  variety  of  ways. 

The  number  of  different  combinations  which  can  thus  be 
produced  by  taking  successively  one,  two,  three,  and  so 
forth  of  these  sub-classes  is  enormous,  and  increases  with  the 
introduction  of  every  fresh  class  term  in  a  way  which  taxes  tbe 
imagination  to  follow.  Thus  three  terms  yield  eight  sub- 
divisions. From  these  we  might  make  eight  distinct  selections 
of  one  only;  28  of  a  pair;  56  of  three  together,  and  so  on. 
The  total  number  of  distinct  groups  which  can  thus  be 
produced  is  8  +  28  +  56  +  70  +  56  +  28  +  8  +  1  or  255. 


256  Logical  statements  or  equations.  [CHAP 

One  case,  and  only  one,  is  excluded  necessarily,  namely 
that  in  which  every  compartment  is  erased,  for  this  corre- 
sponds to  the  one  formal  impossibility  of  endeavouring  to 
maintain  that  every  one  of  our  exhaustive  divisions  is 
unoccupied:  this  being,  as  the  reader  knows,  the  symbolic 
generalization  of  the  Law  of  Excluded  Middle  or  Third.  The 
arithmetical  statement  of  the  total  number  of  cases  is  readily 
enough  written  down.  Three  terms  yield  eight  sub-classes, 
viz.  28;  and  these  eight  sub-classes  may  be  taken  as  above 
in  2s  —  !  ways,  viz.  2s3  — 1  represents  the  possible  varieties 
before  us.  Or  expressed  generally,  if  there  be  n  terms  we 
can  have  2n  classes,  and  accordingly  22"  —  1  distinct  groups  o 
these*  classes.  Of  course  this  expression  increases  with 
enormous  rapidity  as  n  increases.  Four  terms  thus  yield 
65,535  possibilities  in  the  way  of  combination  of  the  elements 
yielded,  and  so  on. 

It  may  be  enquired  here  if  there  is  no  system  of  classifi- 
cation available  for  these  enormous  numbers,  so  as  to  make 
them  somewhat  less  unwieldy  to  deal  with.  This  is  a 
question  which  Prof.  Jevons  has  set  himself  to  answer  in 
what  seems  to  me  the  most  original  part  of  his  logical  inves- 
tigations (Pr,  of  Science,  p.  1 37) .  The  following  (see  next  page) 
is  his  table  of  results  for  the  case  of  three  terms,  A,  B,  G. 

For  a  full  explanation  of  this  table  and  the  way  to 
work  it,  the  reader  must  be  referred  to  the  work  in  question, 
but  a  brief  indication  may  be  offered  here.  Suppose,  for 
instance,  we  had  as  the  result  of  a  set  of  premises,  the  conclu- 
sion1 ABc  =  Q,  AbC=Q.  Suppose  also  that  we  wished  to 
reduce  this  to  a  single  proposition,  if  possible,  of  the  ordinary 
type.  Since  two  combinations  are  destroyed,  we  turn  to 


I  have  employed  Prof.   Jevons'  own  notation  here,  as  the  table  is 
copied  from  his  work. 


XL]  Logical  statements  or  equations.  257 

the    last    column,   and    find    that   there    are   three    types 


Reference 
Number. 

Propositions  expressing  the 
general  type  of  the  logical 
conditions. 

Number  of 
distinct 
logical 
variations. 

Number  of 
combina- 
tions con- 
tradicted 
by  each. 

I 

A=B 

6 

4 

II 

A=AB 

12 

2 

III 

A  =  B,      B=C 

4 

6 

IV 

A  =  B,      B  =  BC 

24 

5 

V 

A  =  AB,    B  =  BG 

24 

4 

VI 

A=BC 

24 

4 

VII 

A=ABC 

24 

3 

VIII 

AB=ABC 

8 

1 

IX 

A  =  AB.    o/B  =  dBc 

24 

3 

X 

A  =  ABC,  ab  =  abC 

8 

4 

XI 

AB  =  ABC,  ab  =  abc 

4 

2 

XII 

AB  =  AC 

12 

2 

XIII 

A  =  BC  •!•  Abe 

8 

3 

-  XIV 

A  =  BG  •!•  be 

2 

4 

XV 

A  =  ABC,a  =  Bc-\.bC 

8 

5 

of  propositions  which  produce  this  amount  of  destruc- 
tion, viz.  II,  xi,  xil.  Accordingly  we  know  that  we  are 
to  seek  amongst  these  for  the  desired  proposition  which  is  to 
sum  up  our  result.  Of  course  this  is  only  a  portion  of  our 
task,  for  these  are  types  merely,  containing  a  variety  of  species 
under  them.  For  instance,  A  =  AB  is  one  of  four  distinct 
species ;  viz.  A  =  AB,  A  =  Ab,  a  =  aB,  a  =  ab:  and  similarly 
with  the  others.  Accordingly  every  species  of  proposition  of 
each  type  may  have  to  be  considered  before  we  finally  hit 
upon  the  right  one.  The  solution  we  are  in  quest  of,  as 
it  happens,  is  one  of  those  in  No.  xn,  viz.  AB  =  AC.  That 
it  will  produce  the  required  destructions,  viz.  those  of  ABc 
and  AbC,  and  of  these  only,  is  evident.  We  may  therefore 
regard  it  as  the  answer. 

The  nature  and  use  of  such  a  table  as  this  will  be  readily 
v.  L.  17 


2.58  Logical  statements  or  equations.  [CHAP. 

understood  now.  Given,  as  the  final  outcome  of  our  premises, 
a  certain  number  of  subdivisions  destroyed,  we  want  to  find 
one  or  two  propositions  which  shall  sum  up,  that  is,  which 
shall  contain  within  themselves  these  destructions.  In  the 
case  just  noticed,  the  destructions  were  those  of  A  Be  and 
AbC,  and  it  was  found  that  the  one  proposition  AB  —  AG 
would  suffice  thus  to  sum  them  up.  That  is,  it  is  a  compen- 
dious summary  of  the  solution  of  the  problem. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  much  ingenuity  and  labour 
has  been  devoted  to  the  composition  of  this  table  ; — in  fact 
it  involved,  as  a  preliminary,  the  writing  out  and  the 
analysis  and  discussion  of  every  one  of  the  255  possible  cases 
which  we  saw  might  result  from  the  combinations  of  three 
terms.  Moreover  as  a  classification  of  the  forms  of  pro- 
position which  would  produce  these  various  results  it  seems 
to  me  sound  and  successful  on  the  whole1.  But  regarded  as 
a  means  of  solving  an  indeterminate  inverse  problem,  that  is 
of  discovering  the  simplest  propositions  from  which  the 
assigned  destructions  would  result,  it  does  not  seem  to  me 
equally  successful.  We  must  remember  that  even  this 
rather  complicated  table  only  includes  the  consequences  of 
dealing  with  three  terms,  an  unusually  small  number  in  even 
such  simple  examples  as  we  have  employed  in  this  work. 
With  four  terms  there  are  65,535  possible  selections  of  com- 
binations. Prof.  Jevons  considered  that  it  would  take 
several  years  of  continuous  labour  even  to  determine  the 
number  of  possible  types  of  proposition  here;  and,  though 
Prof.  Clifford  solved  this  part  of  the  question  by  showing  that 

1  I  differ  entirely  from  some  of  quire  the  simple  abolition  of    any 

the  assumptions  of  Prof.  Jevons  by  class  or  its  contradictory:  e.g.  A,  B, 

which    the    number    of   admissible  C,  a,   b,  c.    I  have  already  given 

combinations    is    limited.     For   in-  my  reasons  for  regarding  their  rejec- 

stance    the  results  are  rejected  as  tion  as  arbitrary  and  unphilosophi- 

•' inconsistent"    whenever   they  re-  cal. 


XL]  Logical  statements  or  equations.  259 

there  were  396  such  types,  he  still  considers  that  such  a 
period  would .  be  required  to  ascertain  what  these  types 
actually  are.  With  five  terms  the  number  of  possible 
selections  is  4,294,967,295,  and  the  number  of  types  is  one 
which  presumably  no  man  will  ever  determine. 

However  valuable  the  direct  and  indirect  results  of 
classifying  and  analysing  these  prepositional  forms  may  be, 
any  labour  bestowed  upon  them  with  a  view  to  actually 
solving  logical  problems  seems  to  me  scarcely  well  bestowed. 
The  procedure  here  appears  rather  to  be  of  that  kind  which 
tact  and  judgment,  aided  by  graphical  methods,  will  alone 
suffice  to  grapple  with.  It  is  naturally  allied  to  that  class  of 
physical  investigations  which  we  deal  with  by  the  method 
of  curves.  Suppose  a  quantity  of  values  of  some  element  are 
given,  and  we  want  to  determine  the  law  involved  in  them. 
What  we  should  do  is  to  draw  ordinates  corresponding  to 
these  values,  and  trace  a  curve  through  their  extremities, 
and  then  endeavour,  by  the  help  of  the  eye,  to  detect, 
at  any  rate  provisionally,  what  kind  of  law  the  curve  follows. 

In  the  case  of  logical  problems  the  corresponding  device 
is  one  which  we  have  already  had  frequent  occasion  to 
use,  viz.  that  of  diagrams.  The  diagram  corresponding  to 
the  two  destructions  of  subdivisions  ABc,  AbC,  is  of  course: 


Looking  at  such  a  diagram  it  seems  to  me  that  one  might 
readily  detect  that  a  good  and  brief  description  of  the  result 
is  that  the  only  A  which  survives  is  that  which  is  both 

17—2 


260  Logical  statements  or  equations.        [CHAP.  xi. 

B  and  C  and  that  which  is  neither.  In  the  notation  above 
adopted  this  would  be  written  down  A  — A  (BC  -\-  be).  At 
first  sight  it  may  seem  that  this  is  a  different  result  from  that 
yielded  by  the  table,  but  a  little  observation  will  show  that 
they  are  equivalent  or  alternative  forms. 

In  the  course  of  Chap.  v.  several  examples  were  given  to 
show  the  kind  of  cases  for  which  this  graphical  method  was 
peculiarly  suitable,  and  in  those  cases  there  can  hardly  be  a 
doubt  of  the  superiority  of  this  plan.  On  the  other  hand 
there  are  cases  in  which  I  can  quite  suppose  that  a  resort  to 
the  table  might  prove  the  more  certain  and  efficacious  plan. 
But  in  admitting  even  this  degree  of  comparison  it  must  be 
remembered  that  it  is  not  credible  that  such  a  table  should 
ever  be  practically  resorted  to  (even  if  it  were  ever  constructed) 
for  more  than  three  terms,  whilst  the  instances  most  appro- 
priate to  the  methods  of  the  Symbolic  Logic  only  begin 
when  we  take  into  account  four  or  more  terms.  An  appeal 
therefore  to  some  kind  of  graphical  aid,  the  usual  resort  of 
science  in  cases  of  this  complicated  character,  seems  the  only 
hopeful  resource  before  us. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

MISCELLANEOUS  EXAMPLES, 

THIS  chapter  is  entirely  devoted  to  the  discussion  of 
examples.  In  so  abstract  a  subject  as  this  it  is  not  easy  to 
explain  principles,  at  any  rate  to  those  who  are  unfamiliar 
with  the  topics  in  question,  except  by  aid  of  a  variety  of 
concrete  instances.  This  will  be  a  justification  for  treating 
the  first  few  examples  at  considerable  length.  Had  our 
object  been  to  show  the  possible  brevity  of  the  methods 
at  our  disposal  most  of  these  examples  could  have  been 
worked  out  in  a  few  lines.  But,  as  just  intimated,  this 
chapter  is  intended  mainly  for  beginners. 

(1)  Suppose  we  were  asked  to  discuss  the  following  set 
of  club  rules,  in  respect  of  their  formal  completeness  and 
accuracy : — 

a.  The  Financial  Committee  shall  be  chosen  from  amongst 
the  General  Committee. 

ft.  No  one  shall  be  a  member  both  of  the  General  and 
Library  Committees  unless  he  be  also  on  the  Financial 
Committee. 

7.  No  member  of  the  Library  Committee  shall  be  on  the 
Financial  Committee. 

Put  x  to  stand  for  the  class  constituting  the  Financial 


262  Miscellaneous  Examples.  [CHAP. 

Committee,  y  for  that  of  the  Library,  and  z  for  that  of 
the  General.  Then  the  three  given  rules  will  stand  as 
follows  :  —  I  state  them,  both  in  the  form  most  natural  to  the 
ordinary  Logic,  and  in  the  equivalent  negative  form  which  is 
most  convenient  for  our  symbolic  system. 

(a)     All  x  is  z  "I  xz  =  0  j 

($)     All  yz  is  x\  .  xyz  =  0  i  . 

(y)     No  x  is  y  J  xy  =  Q\ 

As  the  rules  were  given,  they  might  very  likely  pass 
muster.     But  develop  the  symbolic  expressions  by  our  process 
of  subdivision,  or  rather  develop  in  this  way  rules  (a)  and  (7), 
for  rule  (/3)  already  stands  in  its  lowest  terms. 
They  then  stand  thus  :  — 


xyz  =  i)r. 
xyz  +  xyz  =  0j 

It  is  now  obvious  at  a  glance  that  the  third  rule  is 
partially  redundant,  or  at  any  rate  that  the  first  and 
third  together  are  so  ;  for  they  partially  overlap  each 
other  by  both  of  them  denying  the  same  element  xyz. 
Accordingly  they  would  stand  better  stated  without  redun- 
dancy in  the  form, 

xyz  +  ocyz  =  0] 
xyz  =  0  \  > 


in  which  form  they  are  perfectly  distinct  and  consistent  with 
one  another. 

Of  course  when  we  have  thus  analyzed  and  corrected 
them  there  are  reasons  of  brevity  for  seeking  to  express 
them  in  the  most  compendious  form.  The  best  way  of 
effecting  this  (which  it  must  be  observed  is  purely  a  matter 
of  tact  and  skill,  for  which  no  strict  rules  can  be  given)  is 


XII.]  Miscellaneous  Examples.  263 

to  put  the  first  rule  back  into  its  original  shape,  and  then  to 
combine  the  other  two  into  one.  As  regards  the  last  step  : 
symbolically,  we  just  add  the  two  together  ;  logically,  we  say 
that  if  there  can  be  no  yz  which  is  x,  and  none  which  is  not, 
then  there  can  be  no  yz  at  all.  The  whole  force  of  the  rules 
therefore  is  fully  expressed  by  the  two  equations  :  — 

ocz  =  0 


Or  in  words, 

[All  the  Financial  Committee  are  on  the  General 

Committee. 
I  None  of  the  Library  Committee  are  on  the  General 

Committee. 

This  example  is  of  course  intended  to  be  a  very  simple 
one,  but  it  serves  to  call  attention  to  two  points  of  some 
importance. 

In  the  first  place  it  brings  out  clearly  one  of  the  objects 
and  uses  of  the  process  of  Development  or  Subdivision. 
When  we  proceed  to  break  up  each  separate  assertion  that  is 
given  to  us  into  its  ultimate  details,  it  becomes  very  easy  to 
see  whether  or  not  they  partially  overlap  ;  and  if  so,  whether 
these  overlapping  parts  are,  as  usual,  simple  redundancies,  or 
whether  they  amount  to  direct  inconsistencies.  Such  redun- 
dancies and  inconsistencies  would  in  general  be  obvious 
enough  at  once  when  they  are  complete;  but  when  they  are 
only  partial,  especially  when  they  are  expressed  in  the  vague 
forms  of  ordinary  language,  they  may  very  easily  escape  our 
notice. 

In  the  second  place,  it  should  be  observed  how  free  from 
ambiguity  is  our  symbolic  notation,  as  compared  with  the 
expressions  of  common  language,  owing  to  our  making 
no  'implications',  but  only  direct  and  unconditional  state- 


264  Miscellaneous  Examples.  [CHAP. 

ments;  at  least  in  the  form  in  which  we  write  our  equations 
down.  The  symbolic  statements,  as  we  saw.  are  in  no  sense 
inconsistent,  though  they  are  to  some  extent  redundant. 
But  when  we  look  at  the  verbal  statements  we  find  that 
these  convey  misleading  suggestions.  "No  one  shall  be 
a  member  of  the  Library  and  General  Committees,  unless  he 
be  also  on  the  Financial": — this  does  not,  it  is  true,  assert 
that  there  is  such  a  class  of  persons  as  those  which  form  the 
subject  of  this  proposition,  but  it  would  always  be  understood 
most  strongly  to  suggest  that  there  is.  The  symbolic  state- 
ment is  quite  clear  upon  this  point.  It  confines  itself  to 
denials  only,  and  to  these  it  unconditionally  adheres. 

(2)  Three  persons  A,  B,  G,  are  set  to  sort  a  heap  of 
books  in  a  library.  A  is  told  to  collect  all  the  English 
political  works,  and  the  bound  foreign  novels :  B  is  to  take  the 
bound  political  works,  and  the  English  novels,  provided 
they  are  not  political :  to  C  is  assigned  the  bound  English 
works  and  the  unbound  political  novels.  What  works 
will  be  claimed  by  two  of  them  ?  Will  any  be  claimed  by 
all  three  ? 

Put  a  for  English,  then  1  —  a1  stands  for  foreign. 

b    „  political,    ,,1—6        „       „    not-political. 

c    „  bound,       „     1  —  c        „       „    unbound. 

d  „  novels,       „     1  —  d       „       „    not-novels. 

The  propositions  therefore  assigning  the  apportionment  of 
the  various  books  will  then  stand  as  follows  ;  A  standing  for 
the  books  assigned  to  A,  and  so  on ; — 

A  =  ab  +  (1  -  a)  cd  ] 
B  =  bc  +  (l  -b)ad\. 
C  =  ac+(l-c)  bd\ 

1  a  is  the  abbreviated  form,  of  course ;  but  I  purposely  choose  rarious 
forms  of  expression  here. 


xii.]  Miscellaneous  Examples.  265 

Now  we  know  that  x  and  y  being  any  class  terms, 
the  expression  xy  stands  for  what  is  common  to  both  x  and  y. 
Hence  to  indicate  generally  the  books  belonging  to  A  and  B, 
we  should  write  AB  ;  or  if,  as  here,  we  want  to  know  the 
classes  in  their  details,  we  should  multiply  together  the 
detailed  descriptions  of  them  ;  that  is, 

{ab  +  (1  -  o)  cd]  {be  +  (1  -  6)  ad}. 

'Multiply'  out  this  product,  then,  according  to  the 
symbolic  rules  of  logic,  and  we  have 

AB  =  abc  +  (I  —  a)  bed, 
=  be  [a  +  (1  -  a)  d}. 

That  is,  put  into  words,  we  have  assigned  to  both  A  and  B 
the  class  of  books  describable  briefly  as  'bound  political 
works;  whether  English  generally,  or  foreign  novels.'  Precisely 
similar  expressions  would  be  yielded  for  BC,  and  A  C,  viz.  for 
the  books  assigned  to  B  and  C,  and  to  A  and  G. 

In  the  same  way  if  the  question  be  to  find  what  books  are 
assigned  to  all  three  persons,  we  should  have  to  find  the 
details  of  the  expression  ABG.  This  is  simpler  in  its  result, 
since  more  of  the  terms  neutralize  each  other;  we  find 
in  fact 


That  is,  the  only  books  which  have  been  thus  assigned  to  all 
three  are  the  'bound  English  political  works'. 

(3)  The  following  may  be  offered  as  an  example  of  the 
inverse  process  corresponding  to  the  sign  of  division  ;  —  It  is 
found  that  when  all  the  books  in  a  library,  except  philosophy 
and  divinity,  are  rejected,  they  are  reduced  to  philosophy 
and  protestant  divinity;  but  include  all  works  on  those 
subjects.  What  is  the  widest  and  the  narrowest  extent,  so  far 
as  expressible  in  these  class  terms,  which  the  library  could 
have  possessed  under  the  given  conditions  ? 


266  Miscellaneous  Examples.  [CHAP. 

What  is  really  asserted  here,  is,  that  when  the  restriction 
of  being  confined  to  'philosophy  and  divinity'  is  imposed  upon 
the  books,  they  are  exactly  reduced  to '  philosophy  and  protes- 
tant  divinity'. 

Put  #  for  philosophy, 
y   „   divinity, 
z   „   protestant, 

and  let  w  represent  the  class,  whatever  it  may  be,  constituting 
the  library : 

Then  the  data  assert,  when  expresssed  in  symbolic  form, 

(x  +  xy)  w=x  +  xyz. 

Here,  of  course,  x  +  xy  is  our  strict  expression  for  what  is 
commonly  described  as  'x  or  y\  viz.  'philosophy  or  divinity'. 
The  combination  of  (x  +  xy)  with  w,  by  the  sign  of  multipli- 
cation, indicates  the  restriction  of  w  by  the  stated  condition, 
and  this  is  to  be  equated  to  x  +  xyz.  The  inverse  problem 
therefore  is,  Find  w. 

x  -f  xyz 

Hence  w=-        -  . 

x  +  xy 

Develop  this  expression  in  accordance  with  the  rules,  and 
we  obtain, 

w  =  x  +  xyz  -f  §xy. 

That  is,  the  library  must  have  certainly  contained  all 
philosophy  and  protestant  divinity,  and  may  possibly  have 
contained  any  kind  of  works  which  are  neither  philosophy 
nor  divinity :  this  latter  constituent  being  left  entirely 
indefinite.  Unaided  common  sense  would,  I  doubt  not,  have 
been  sufficient  to  enable  many  persons  to  say  what  the 
positive  and  definite  part  of  the  answer  must  be,  but  it 
is  unlikely  that  they  could  feel  equally  confident  about  the 
exact  limits  of  admissible  indefiniteness. 


xii.]  Miscellaneous  Examples.  207 

The  two  following  are  miscellaneous  examples  of  this 
inverse  process  : — 

(4)  There  is  a  certain  class  of  things  from  which  A  picks 
out  the  'x  that  is  z,  and  the  y  that  is  not  z\  and  B  picks  out 
from  the  remainder  'the  z  which  is  y  and  the  x  that  is  not?/'. 
It  is  then  found  that  nothing  is  left  but  the  class  'z  which  is 
not  x\  What  can  be  determined  about  the  class  originally  ? 

Call  that  class  w.  Then  the  statement  amounts  to  this, 
symbolically ; — 

w  (1  —  xz  —  yz)  (1  —  yz  —  xy)  =  xz, 

For  A,  picking  out  the  (xz  +  yz)  part,  reduces  it  from  w 
to  w—  w  (xz  +  yz),  or  converts  it  into  w  (1  —  xz  —  yz) ;  similarly 
jB's  selection  has  the  same  effect  of  reducing  this  by  the 
multiplication  of  (1  —  yz  —  xy).  This  final  result  is  then 
declared  to  be  exactly  equivalent  to  xz,  as  above  expressed. 

On  multiplying  out,  most  of  the  terms  in  the  brackets 
disappear,  and  we  have 

wxy  =  xz 

xz 

or  w  =  =^, 

xy 

.:  w  =  xyz  +  §  (1  —  xy)  (1  —  xz), 
=  xyz  +  %(x  +  xyz) (1), 

with  the  condition 

xz  (1  -  xy)  =  0, 
or  xyz  =  0 (2). 

That  is,  the  class  must  have  certainly  consisted  of 
'all  z  that  is  neither  x  nor  y'  and  may  have  also  contained 
'  anything  that  is  x,  or  that  is  y  but  neither  x  nor  z ',  but 
nothing  else.  Moreover  by  the  terms  of  statement  'all  yz  is  x '. 

I  append  the  diagram,  as  it  may  serve  to  aid  conviction. 
The  reader  will  readily  see  that  if  from  w  as  thus  composed 


268  Miscellaneous  Examples.  [CHAP. 

we   make   the   two  assigned   selections,  there   will  be  left 


lz  that   is   not  x',  and   that   only.     This   is  equally  so  in 
whichever  order  we  make  the  two  selections. 

(5)  Confining  oneself  to  the  candidates  for  a  certain 
examination  it  was  found  that  the  plucked  exactly  comprised 
the  boys  who  took  Greek  and  the  girls  who  took  Latin. 
Find  the  full  description  of  the  boy  candidates  as  describable 
in  the  other  terms  thus  introduced. 

Put  x  for  Latin. 
z  „   Greek. 

w  „  boys,  .'.  w  =  girls  (these  being  contradictories 
y  „   plucked.  in  that  universe). 

The  statement  is  that, 

y  =  xw  +  zw, 
.'.  w(z  —  x)  =  y  —  x, 

y  —  x 

:.  w  =  e  -  . 

Z—  X 

The  numerator  and  denominator  not  being  here,  sepa- 
rately, as  they  stand,  interpretable  class  expressions,  we  adopt 
the  full  formula 


Hence  w  =  xyz  +  xyz  +  $  (xyz  +  xyz)  .......  (1), 

with  conditions  mjz  +  xyz  =  Q  ......................  (2). 

That  is,  in  words,  The  boys  comprise 


XII.] 


the  whole  of 


an  uncertain 
portion  of 


Miscellaneous  Examples.  269 

those  who  take  Latin  but  not  Greek,  and 

were  not  plucked. 

,,         „       „      Greek  but  not  Latin,  and 
were  plucked. 

„         „       „      Greek  and  Latin,  and  were 

plucked. 
„         „       „      Neither  Greek  nor   Latin, 

and  were  not  plucked. 


With  the  implied  conditions 

f  All  who  took  both  Latin  and  Greek  were  plucked. 
(All  who  were  plucked  took  either  Latin  or  Greek. 


A  few  moments'  attention  may  be  conveniently  directed 
here  to  the  diagrammatic  interpretation  of  the  symbol  g. 
When  we  look  at  the  four  surviving  classes  which  compose  the 
figure  w,  it  might  be  thought  that  they  all  stood  upon  an  equal 
footing  of  certainty,  and  that  there  was  nothing  in  them  cor- 
responding to  the  sharp  distinction  represented  symbolically  by 

iv  =  xyz  +  oSyz  +  %  xyz  -f  £  xy  z. 

But  reflection  soon  shows  the  difference.  The  two  former 
are  completely  describable  in  terms  of  x,  y,  and  z.  The  two 
latter  cannot  be  so  described  without  making  use  of  w  also. 
But  w  being  the  very  term  to  be  denned,  the  admission  of  it 
into  the  definition  is  equivalent  to  no  determination  at 
all.  We  may  make  the  semblance  of  a  determination  by 
writing  it  w  =  xyz  +  xyz  -\-wxyz  +  wxyz, 
but  such  avoidance  of  indeterminateness  is  altogether  delusive. 


270  Miscellaneous  Examples.  [CHAP. 

This  class  w  therefore  contains  the  whole  of  xyz  and  xyz,  and 
'a  part'  of  xyz  and  xyz.  Whether  this  'part',  or  'some',  will 
really  prove  to  be  the  whole,  or  a  part  only,  or  even  none, 
will  depend  upon  circumstances.  If  the  given  premises  are 
to  be  regarded  as  final,  and  as  postulating  the  existence  of  all 
which  they  do  not  deny,  then  this  'part'  is  really  a  part  only, 
and  the  word  some  in  its  common  signification  might  be 
substituted  for  $. 

(6)  As  an  instance  of  the  implied  extinction  of  a  whole 
class,  take  the  following  :  — 

At  a  certain  town  where  an  examination  is  held,  it  is 
known  that, 

1.  Every  candidate  is  either  a  junior  who  does  not 

take'  Latin,  or  a  senior  who  takes  Composition. 

2.  Every  junior   candidate  takes    either    Latin    or 

Composition. 

3.  All  candidates  who  take  Composition,  also  take 

Latin,  and  are  juniors. 

Show  that  if  this  be  so  there  can  be  no  candidates  there. 
Putting  x  for  candidates,  a  and  a  for  junior  and  senior, 
c  for  those  who  take  Latin,  and  e  for  those  who  take  Compo- 
sition, the  data  stand  thus  ;  — 

x  =  £  (dc  +  ae), 


ex  =  $  ac. 

These  resolve  at  once  into  the  negations 
xae,  xac,  xce  ] 
axce  I  =  0, 

aex,  cex         } 

Gathering  together  the  factors  of  x  we  have,  in  slightly 
different  order, 

x  \ae  +  ae  +  a  (c  +  ce)  +  ce  +  ce]  =  0. 


XIL]  Miscellaneous  Examples.  271 

This  accounts  for  all  the  possible  factors  of  x;  as  would 
be  seen  at  once  by  subdividing  these  terms,  when  all  the 
eight  possible  combinations  of  a,  c,  e,  will  be  found  to 
be  represented  here  with  some  redundancies.  (These  redun- 
dancies were  no  part  of  the  original  statements,  but  come 
from  the  fact  of  our  having  taken  more  multipliers  than  were 
necessary.  Thus,  in  the  three  obtained  from  the  first  state- 
ment, ce  is  contained  in  the  other  two ;  and  the  two  obtained 
from  the  third  have  a  common  part.) 

(7)     In  the  last  example  one  whole  class  was  seen  to 
have  perished.     In  such  cases,  or  when  the  destruction  is 
even  more  extensive,  the  results  are  often  more  easily  inter- 
preted by  aid  of  the  diagrams  than  by  relying  only  on  symbols. 
For  instance, 

x  =  y  +  zy, 
y  T=  ~z  +  zw, 
w  =  Q, 
xw  =  yzw. 

Looking  out  for  the  appropriate  multipliers,  as  already 
indicated,  the  following  classes  are  abolished  : — 

(1)     xyz,xy,xyz.  (2)     yzw,  yz,  yzw. 

(3)     zw.  (4)     xyw,  xzw,  xyzw. 

Shade  out  in  the  diagram,  and  it  stands  thus : — 


(The  outside,  or  xyzw,  should  also  be  shaded,  to  make  it 
complete.) 


272  Miscellaneous  Examples.  [CHAP. 

It  is  obvious  at  a  glance  that  all  w  is  destroyed,  and  that 
the  only  surviving  compartment  is  xyz.  This  would  be 
described  verbally  in  the  statements, 

(Everything  is  x,  y,  and  z. 
[Nothing  is  w. 

(The  same  example,  with  other  letters,  was  discussed  in 
the  note  on  p.  148.) 

The  next  two  examples  have  some  historic  interest,  as 
representing  early  attempts  at  the  symbolic  solutions  of 
problems. 

(8)  If  x  that  is  not  a  is  the  same  as  b,  and  a  that  is  not 
x  is  the  same  as  c,  what  is  x  in  terms  of  a,  b,  and  c  ?     (Lam- 
bert, Log.  Abh.  I.  14.) 

Since  x  —  ax  +  ax,  .'.  x  —  ax  =  ax,       orx—b  =  ax. 

Since  a  =  ax  +  ax, .:  ax  =  a  —  ax  =  a  —  c. 

/.  x  —  b  =  a  —  c,  or  x  =  a  +  b  —  c. 

(It  will  be  seen,  from  the  terms  of  statement,  that  a 
and  b  are  mutually  exclusive ;  also  that  c  is  a  part  of  a. 
Hence  the  whole  result,  as  it  stands,  is  really  correctly 
stated,  though  it  apparently  involves  double  counting  and 
inappropriate  subtraction.)  I  append  Lambert's  solution  in 
his  own  notation  ; — 

"Man  habe  x\a  =  b\  a\x=c,  so  ist  [by  a  former  result] 
ax  =  a  —  c=x  —  b.  Folglich  x  =  a  +  b  —  c." 

ft*  II' 

(9)  If  xy  =  zw,  is  it  correct  to  conclude  that  -  =     ?     Or, 

z     y 

put  into  words,  if  the  members  common  to  x  and  y  are  the 
same  as  those  common  to  z  and  w,  does  it  follow  that 
the  class  which  on  restriction  by  z  will  reduce  to  x  is 
the  same  as  that  which  on  restriction  by  y  will  reduce  to  w  ? 
Lambert  more  than  once  assumes  that  this  is  so,  but  it 


xii.]  Miscellaneous  Examples.  273 

is  soon  seen  (I  think)  that  he  was  in  error.     For  develop  the 

x        ,  w 

two  expressions  -  and  — , 

t/ 

and  we  have, 

xz  +  %xz  =  wy  +  %wy, 
with  the  two  conditions, 

xz  =  0,  wy  =  0. 

Now  the  equation  of  two  determinate  classes  implies  that 
everything  whick -falls  within  one  shall  also  fall  within  the 
other.  I  do  not  feel  perfectly  certain  about  the  application 
of  this  principle  to  the  case  of  two  classes  each  of  which  has 
an  indeterminate  addition  to  it,  but  on  the  whole  it  seems 
to  me  to  demand  that  the  determinate  and  indeterminate 
portions  shall  be  separately  equated;  i.e.  xz  =  wy  and  xz  =  wy. 
It  is  readily  seen  that  all  these  conditions,  taken  together, 
lead  to  x  =  w,  z  =  y.  The  meaning  of  this  is  that  two  logical 
fractions  can  only  be  equated  by  the  identification  of  both 
their  numerators  and  their  denominators.  And  this,  I  think, 
is  what  we  should  expect,  inasmuch  as  we  cannot  strike  out 
common  factors  as  we  should  in  algebra  or  arithmetic. 

Lambert's  error  here  deserves  the  more  notice,  because  he 
had  gained  a  very  remarkable  grasp  of  the  truth  in  an 
analogous,  though  somewhat  simpler  case.  He  most  distinctly 
states  that  we  cannot  put  logical  division  on  the  same  footing 
as  ordinary  division,  by  striking  out  common  factors:  and 
this,  not  because  the  result  would  be  false,  but  because 
it  would  not  be  general  enough.  That  is,  we  ought  to  have 
an  indeterminate  result,  instead  of  a  determinate  one.  His 

ry 

words  are, "Wenn  xy  =  ay,  so  ist  x  =  ayy~1=a  —  .     Aber 

7 

deswegen  nicht  allezeit  x  =  a  ;  sondern  nur  in  einem  einzigen 

Falle,   weil  x  und   a   zwei   verschiedene   Arten    von    dem 

Geschlecht  xy  oder  ay  sein  konnen.     Wenn  aber  xy  =  ay 

V.  L.  18 


274  Miscellaneous  Examples.  [CHAP. 

nicht  weiter  bestimmt  wird,  so  kann  man  unter  andern  auch 
x  =  a.  setzen."  That  is,  x  =  a.  is  one  solution  of  the  problem 1. 

(10)  Express  symbolically,  'If  a;  is  y,  then  z  is  w'.  Of 
course  if  we  were  allowed  to  represent  the  two  clauses  as 
wholes,  we  might  replace  them  by  single  letters  (say  a  and  ft), 
and  phrase  it,  'If  a  then  ft',  or  aft=0.  But  I  assume  that 
all  four  letters  are  to  be  exhibited.  Now  '  x  is  y '  is  express- 
ed xy  =  0,  and  '  z  is  w '  is  expressed  zw  =  0.  What  then  we 
want  to  convey  is  that  if  xy  =  0  then  zw  =  0. 

This  is  readily  done  if  the  reader  will  bear  in  mind  that, 
on  our  interpretation  of  propositions,  'if  a  then  ft'  merely 
denies  the  combination  '  a  true,  ft  false ',  viz.  denies  the  com- 
bination a  =  1,  ft  =  0.  Accordingly,  just  as 

AJ.jc  =  l)  A  j     •       2  =  1) 

xy  =  0  denies         _  Y  and  zw  =  0  denies 

y  =  OJ  w  =  Oj 

so  does  zw  (1  —  xy)  =  0  deny        _    [  which  is  what  we  want 

/ 

to  deny.     Hence  '  If  x  is  y,  then  z  is  w '  is  duly  expressed  by 

a—  Wit  I     911)  *""~  l| 
—  xry)  zw  —  \) 

or  (xy  +  xy  +  xy)  zw  =  0. 

The  reader  will  see,  in  the  annexed  diagram,  that  the 
assumption  of  x  being  y,  or  xy  =  0,  leads  at  once  to  the  con- 

y_ 

x  (  ±w 


1  The  reader  will  see  that  3-7  =  07      only  coincide  in  case  073=0,  and 
gives  ayx=0,  ayx=0;   whilst  x  =  a       ayx  =  0. 
gives  o*=0,  ax=0.    The  two  will 


xii.]  Miscellaneous  Examples.  27  5 

elusion  that  z  is  w,  or  zw  =  Q.  (We  shall  recur  to  this 
example  again,  in  connexion  with  another  system  of  notation, 
which,  in  cases  of  this  particular  kind,  possesses  some  advan- 
tages.) 

(11)  If  a  genus  A  is  divisible  into  the  species  x,  y,  z,... 
and  also  into  a,  /3,  7,...  ;  and  if  we  know  that  all  x  is  a,  all  y 
is  /3,  all  z  is  7,  and  so  on  ;  then,  conversely,  all  a  is  x,  all  ft 
is  y,  all  7  is  z,  and  so  on. 

This  example  is  taken  from  Hauber1,  and  can  be  solved 
at  once  under  the  conditions  implied.  The  species  he  under- 
stands to  be  mutually  exclusive,  so  that  we  may  write  the 
data, 


I-.  (a,_a)  +  (y-£)+05-7)  +  ...         =0, 
or  (xd-Qix)  +  (y@-fiy)  +  (zy-Tz)  +  ...         =  0. 
But  'All  x  is  a'  gives  xaL  =  0,  and  so  on. 

Hence  dx  +  (3y  +  ryz  +  ...         =  0. 

That  is,  under  the  same  implied  conditions  of  mutual 
exclusion  of  the  species, 

ax  =  0,  /3i/  =  0,  72  =  0. 

Or,  'All  a  is  x\  'All  /3  is  y\  'All  7  is  z\  which  was  to  be 
proved. 

(12)  Much  of  the  prejudice  which  still  exists  against  the 
employment  of  the  symbolic  methods  in  Logic  must  be  attri- 
buted, unless  I  am  mistaken,  to  the  extreme  length  and  elabo- 
ration with  which  Boole  has  generally  worked  out  his  results. 
What  he  seemed  to  care  for  was  theoretic  perfection  of 
method  in  the  generality  of  his  solution,  and  consequent 
certainty  of  obtaining  the  desired  result,  rather  than  prac- 

1  Schol<zlogico-mathematic(z,l829.      containing  a  variety  of  good  logical 
A  work  mainly  mathematical,  but      hints  and  generalizations. 

18—2 


276  Miscellaneous  Examples.  [CHAP. 

tical  convenience  in  working.  It  may  be  well  therefore  to 
point  out  in  how  many  cases  this  tediousness  of  operation 
may  be  avoided.  Here,  as  in  mathematics,  there  are  a  va- 
riety of  devices  open  to  us  by  which  particular  conclusions 
may  often  be  obtained  with  much  brevity  and  ease. 

For  instance  the  plan,  to  which  allusion  has  frequently 
been  made  already,  of  looking  out  for  the  appropriate  multi- 
pliers by  which  to  break  up  our  equations  into  their  elemen- 
tary denials,  will  often  save  much  trouble.  In  such  examples 
as  we  have  already  had  the  reader  will  probably  have  detected 
the  nature  of  this  operation  for  himself,  and  in  no  case  could 
it  give  any  trouble  to  those  who  have  learnt  elementary 
algebra,  but  for  the  convenience  of  others  it  may  be  worth 
while  explaining  it  briefly. 

Take,  for  instance,  the  following  example  from  Boole 
(Laws  of  Thought,  p.  118,  —  the  wording  is  slightly  altered). 

(1)  Wherever  the  properties  x  and  y  are  combined,  either 
the  property  z  or  the  property  w  is  present  also,  but  not  both 
of  them. 

(2)  Wherever  y  and  z  are  combined,  x  and  w  are  either 
both  present  or  both  absent. 

(3)  "Wherever  x  and  y  are  both  absent,  z  and  w  are  both 
absent  also,  and  vice  versa. 

The  problem  then  is,  to  determine  what  may  be  inferred 
from  the  presence  of  x  with  respect  to  the  presence  or 
absence  of  y  and  2,  paying  no  regard  to  w  ;  that  is,  elimina- 
ting w. 

The  symbolic  statement  of  these  data  stands  as  follows  :  — 


Now  it  is  clearly  no  good  doing  anything  which  will  make 


xii.]  Miscellaneous  Examples.  277 

the  left  side  of  the  first  two  equations  vanish ;  for  this, 
leaving  only  indeterminate  terms,  will  lead  to  nothing. 
Accordingly  we  need  only  ask  what  factors  will  make  the 
right  side  disappear.  As  regards  the  first  equation,  either 
w  or  z  will  destroy  the  first  term,  and  either  w  or  ~z  will 
destroy  the  second.  Of  the  four  combinations  thus  produced 
two,  viz.  ww  and  zz,  are  of  course  ineffective  since  they 
destroy  both  sides.  This  leaves  two  available  factors,  viz.  wz 
and  wz.  Thus  the  first  equation  breaks  up  into  xyzw  =  Q, 
xyzw  =  0.  Similarly  for  the  second  there  are  two  available 
factors,  viz.  am  and  xw,  the  other  two  being  ineffective  as  in 
the  last  case.  Consequently  this  yields  xyzw  =  0,  xyzw  =  0. 
In  the  third  case  there  being  no  indeterminate  factor,  the 
abolition  of  either  term  will  lead  to  something.  Now  either 
w  or  z  will  destroy  the  right  side,  and  either  x  or  y  the  left. 
Consequently,  by  multiplication,  we  get  four  denials  here. 

The  net  results  of  the  three  premises  may  be  thus  written 
down: — 

xywz          xwz"\ 

xywz         yp[=0...  /-n 

xywz         xyw  j 

xywz  xyz J 

A  very  little  practice  and  experience  would  of  course 
avoid  even  this  amount  of  trouble,  for  one  would  soon  come 
to  remember  that  'All  A  is  either  B  or  C  only'  was  resolvable 
into  'There  is  no  A  which  is  both  B  and  C,  and  there  is  none 
which  is  neither'. 

Starting  again  with  these  eight  denials  Boole's  conclusion 
may  be  readily  obtained.  What  we  want  is  an  account  of  x 
without  w.  Now  there  is  only  one  of  the  eight  free  from  w  as 
it  stands1,  viz.  the  8th ;  and  it  is  easily  seen  that  there  are  only 

1  For  further  discussion  of  this  point  see  the  next  chapter. 


278  Miscellaneous  Examples.  [CHAP- 

two  others  which  taken  together  can  be  freed  from  w,  viz.  the 
1st  and  3rd,  for  these  combined  yield  xyz  =  0.  Hence  what 
we  want  is  given  by  the  two  following : 

xyz  =  0] 
xyz  = 

Add  these  together  and  we  have 
x(yz-yz)  =  l 

orx-   yz 

\JL     **/  — 


yz-yz 
Develop  the  right  side,  and  we  obtain 


or,  more  briefly, 

»=y*+P  ...........................  (3), 

which  is  Boole's  conclusion,  viz.  "Wherever  x  is  found  there 
will  either  y  be  absent  and  z  present,  or  z  will  be  absent; 
and  conversely,  where  y  is  absent  and  z  present,  there  will  x 
be  present".  This  may  be  called,  by  comparison,  the  predi- 
cative reading  of  the  result.  Another  reading  of  it  would  be 
"The  class  x  consists  of  the  class  which  is  z  but  not  y,  and 
possibly  'some'  of  that  which  is  not  z". 

For  the  practical  purpose  of  solving  problems  this  plan  of 
looking  out  for  suitable  multipliers  will  generally  be  found 
the  most  expeditious.  Though  not  actually  proposed  by 
Boole  it  is  readily  suggested  by,  and  indeed  is  almost  con- 
tained in,  his  scheme  of  solution.  The  theoretical  defect  in 
it,  to  the  eye  of  a  rigid  formal  thinker,  is,  thaft  as  thus  carried 
out  the  resultant  elementary  denials  are  generally  to  some 
extent  redundant.  They  cover  the  whole  ground,  and  there- 
fore give  us  the  whole  available  information,  but  they  do  a 
little  more  ;  for,  trespassing  to  some  extent  upon  each  other's 
ground,  they  state  the  denials  with  some  needless  superfluity. 


xii.]  Miscellaneous  Examples.  279 

(13)     As  another  instance  of  an  abbreviation  in  working 
take  the  following  :  —  • 


It  is  desired  to  obtain  xz  in  terms  of  a  and  c,  y  being  eli- 
minated. It  may  be  remarked  that  this  is  a  perfectly  general 
rendering  of  the  syllogism1,  and  the  solution,  involving  as  it 
does,  five  terms,  is  of  almost  startling  length  and  complexity 
if  treated  in  strict  accordance  with  Boole's  method.  It  may 
be  got  almost  at  once  as  follows  :  — 

xz  =  xz(y  +  y)  (developing  with  respect  to  y) 
=  xyz  +  xyz 


—  ac  +  xy.yz  ....................................  (1). 

Now,  though  xy  cannot  be  expressed  in  terms  of  xy  or  a, 
it  can  in  terms  of  \-ocy  or  a.     For  \  —  xy  =  xy  +  Hcy  +  xy,  so 
that  xy  may  be  described  as  an  uncertain,  or  $  part  of  1  —  #y 
or  a.     That  is,  xy  =  £a.     Similarly  yz  =  $c,  so  that  xy  .  yz  = 
%ac. 

.'.  Finally  xz  =  ac  +  $ac  ...........................  (2), 

which  is  the  answer  desired. 

(14)     Develop  the  expression, 

l-xy 


The  main  difficulty  of  developing  this  by  Boole's  rule  is 
the  extreme  liability  to  error  in  substituting  1  and  0  respec- 
tively for  x,  y,  z,  and  their  contradictories.  Regarding  each 
group  as  a  single  class  we  write  it  down  at  once  ; 

w  =  I  -  xy  +  ${1  -  xy  -  xy  -  z(xy  +  xy)}  ; 

1  See  on,  Chapter  xv. 


280  Miscellaneous  Examples.  [CHAP. 

or,  replacing  1  —  xy  —  xy  by  its  equivalent  xy  +  xy, 
this  becomes 


(i); 

whilst  the  condition  implied  in  the  form  of  statement  here 
becomes 

(1  -  xy)  {l-xy-xy-  z(xy  +  xy)}  =  0, 
or,  after  multiplying  out, 

xyz  =  Q (2). 

This  serves  to  reduce  (1)  to  a  still  simpler  form,  viz. 

w—  1  —  xy  +  ^xyz. 

(15)  The  following  example  is,  I  think,  the  most  intri- 
cate of  any  given  by  Boole  : — (Laws  of  Thought,  p.  146.) 

1.  Wherever  x  and  z  are  missing,  u  is  found,  with  one 
(but  not  both)  of  y  and  w. 

2.  Wherever  x  and  w  are  found  whilst  u  is  missing,  y 
and  z  will  both  be  present  or  both  absent. 

3.  Wherever  x  is  found  with  either  or  both  of  y  and  u 
there  will  z  or  w  (but  not  both)  be  found ;  and  conversely. 

They  may  be  written 

{xz  =  %u(yw  +  yw)  yw,  yw 

xwu  =  %(yz  +  yz)  yz,  yz 

x(y  +  yu)  =  (zw  +  zw)         zw,  zw ;  x,  yu. 
The  appropriate  factors  being  employed  (they  are  written 
at  the  side)  these  equations  resolve  into 
xyzw,  xyzw, 
xyzwu,  xyzwu, 
(xyzw,  xyzw,  xyzwu,  xyzwu, 
(xzw,  xzw,  yzwu,  yzwu. 

These  twelve  denials  contain  all  that  the  equations  have 
to  say,  with  some  trivial  redundancies.  Some  of  them,  as 
containing  fewer  terms,  that  is,  as  being  less  subdivided,  are 
more  comprehensive  in  their  scope  than  others. 


XTI.]  Miscellaneous  Examples.  281 

Now  draw  the  5-term  diagram,  and  shade  out  the  terms 
thus  marked1.  (On  the  pieced  diagram  board,  described  in 
Chap,  v.,  they  could  be  picked  out  and  removed  in  a  few 
minutes.)  We  have  the  following  result : — 


On  looking  at  this  diagram,  several  of  the  various  conclu- 
sions which  Boole  has  drawn  are  almost  intuitively  obvious. 
Thus  that  'there  is  no  xzw'  (<my  =  0);  that  'all  w  is  either  x 
or  z*  (xzw  =  0);  that  'all  z  is  either  x  or  w'  (xzw  =  0).  These 
are  the  sort  of  conclusions  to  which  diagrams  specially  lend 
themselves;  for  in  each  case  we  extinguish  a  connected  group 
of  classes,  and  each  extinction  readily  catches  the  eye  in  a 
figure. 

Similarly  it  is  not  difficult  to  verify  the  conclusion  that 
'wherever  x  is  found  there  will  be  found  either  z  or  w  (but 
not  both)  or  else  y,  z,  and  w  will  all  be  absent;  and  conversely' 
(Boole,  p.  148).  Symbolically  this  stands 

x  =  zw  +  zw  +  y  z  w. 

On  looking  at  the  composition  of  x  in  the  diagram  it  will 
readily  be  seen  that  it  is  made  up  of  these  three  (in  their 
ultimate  subdivision,  six)  constituents.  This  sort  of  conclusion, 
though  easy  to  verify  by  a  figure,  is  probably  easier  to  obtain 
(apart  from  the  extreme  and  inevitable  tediousness)  from  the 
symbolic  letters. 

1  We  have  not  troubled  to  shade  the  outside  of  this  diagram,  viz.  xyzwu. 


282  Miscellaneous  Examples.  [CHAP. 

The  reader  will  observe  that  this  work  of  summing  up  the 
surviving  classes  into  compendious  propositions  is  that  syn- 
thetic operation  described  at  the  end  of  the  last  chapter. 
What  aid  can  be  afforded  by  appeal  to  rules  and  tables,  in 
any  cases  but  those  which  are  mostly  too  simple  to  require 
such  aid  at  all,  will  be  understood  by  recalling  to  mind  that 
the  total  number  of  possible  results  is  4,294,967,295  with 
five  terms.  Any  table  which  was  prepared  to  supersede  the 
intelligent  appeal  to  graphical  or  diagrammatic  aid  would 
involve  the  analysis  and  classification  of  all  these  results. 

In  discussing  inverse  forms  we  have  naturally  taken  for 
consideration,  in  the  first  place,  those  in  which  the  numerator 

rj* 

of  the  fraction  is  definite,  of  which  -  is  the  type.     But  in 

«7 

practice  we  may  often  find  that  they  present  themselves  in 
what  is  really  equivalent  to  the  form  $x  +  y.  The  logical 
interpretation  here  ought  not  to  present  the  slightest  difficulty. 
All  that  we  were  doing  in  the  former  case  was  to  enquire  for 
any  class  the  part  of  which  common  to  it  and  to  y  should  be 
identical  with  x\  whilst  all  that  we  are  here  doing  is  to 
enquire  for  any  class  the  part  of  which  common  to  it  and  to  y 
shall  be  included  in  x,  that  is,  shall  'be'  x  in  the  common 
predicative  sense  of  the  word.  Or,  stating  the  questions  in 
the  interrogative  form,  they  stand  thus  ;  — 

If  z  which  is  y  is  identical  with  x,  find  z.  (zy  =  x,  .'.  z  =  -.  J 

If  z  which  is  y  is  x,  find  z.     (zy  =  $#,  .'.  z  =  $x  +  y.} 
Whether  the  latter  be  stated  in  the  form  zy  =  $x,  or  in 
the  form  zy  =  zyxt  it  equally  yields  zyx  =  0, 


or,  more  briefly,  =  %x  +  $xy. 


xii.]  Miscellaneous  Examples.  283 

That  is,  in  words,  z  may  be  'anything  that  is  x,  or  that  is 
neither  x  nor  y  ',  under  the  assigned  circumstances. 

The  reader  should  carefully  observe  that  there  is  no  con- 
dition implied  here  in  the  mere  statement  of  the  question, 

/*» 

corresponding  to  the  condition  xy  —  Q,  in  the  case  of  -.    That 

*J 

condition  arose  out  of  the  demand  that  the  restricted  or  com- 
mon class  should  be  identical  with  x  ;  the  mere  reference  of 
it  to  x  makes  no  such  requirement,  provided  of  course  we 
allow  to  x  as  a  class  term  the  customary  freedom  of  range 
from  nothing  to  all  inclusive. 

(16)  Take  a  concrete  instance.  'When  all  the  books  on 
philosophy  are  omitted  from  one  of  my  bookcases  there  is 
nothing  left  but  books  on  mathematics.  What  did  the  book- 
case contain  originally?'  The  answer  is  that  it  may  have 
contained  anything  whatever  excepting  what  was  neither 
philosophy  nor  mathematics  ;  an  answer  of  course  which  is 
intuitively  obvious,  as  it  could  hardly  fail  to  be  in  such  a 
simple  case. 

Let  z—  contents  of  bookcase, 

x  =  philosophy, 

y  =  mathematics. 
/.  z(l-x)  =  fly,         zxy  =  0, 


(17)  The  following  general  formulae  of  substitution  are 
worth  considering  for  the  sake  of  their  logical  interpreta- 
tion :  — 

(1)  1  —  xyzw  ......  =  x  +  xy  +  xyz  +  xyzw  +  ...... 

(2)  I—  xyzw  ......  =x  +  xy  +  xyz  +  xyzw  +  ...... 

The  former  asserts  that  whatever  is  not  simultaneously  x, 
y,  z,  w,  and  so  forth,  must  fail  either  to  be  x,  or  y,  or  z,  or  so 


284  Miscellaneous  Examples.  [CHAP.  xn. 

on;  and  that  conversely,  the  classes  of  things  which  fail  to  be 
x,  or  fail  to  be  y,  and  so  on,  together  constitute  everything 
which  is  not  at  once  x,  y,  z,  &c.  Common  language  of  course 
expresses  this  in  words  which  literally  translated  would  yield 
the  formula  l—xyzw...  =  x  +  y  +  z+...,  in  which  it  is 
followed  by  those  symbolists  who  adopt  the  non-exclusive  no- 
tation for  alternatives  :  to  me  it  seems  that  rigid  symbolic 
propriety  suggests  our  inserting  the  letters  requisite  to  make 
our  various  classes  mutually  exclusive. 

The  latter  formula  merely  differs  from  the  former  in  a 
verbal  way.  It  declares  that  whatever  does  not  simulta- 
neously fail  to  be  x,  y,  z,  w,  and  so  on,  must  be  either  x,  or, 
failing  that,  y,  or,  failing  that,  z,  and  so  on. 

(18)  The  continued  repetition  of  the  inverse  operation 
will  not  give  rise  to  any  peculiar  intricacies  in  Logic.  No 
doubt  such  an  expression  as 

$  X  -r-x-7-y  -T-  z  -^w 

does  not  look  the  kind  of  thing  of  which  Logic  has  been 
accustomed  to  take  cognizance.  Put  it  into  words,  however, 
and  it  is  seen  to  be  nothing  but  a  very  concise  symbolic 
indication  of  "the  class  which  on  successive  restriction  by  w,  z, 
y,  x,  shall  possess  nothing  but  what  is  X  ".  Let  this  class  be 
Y,  then  we  have 


YXxyzw  =  0, 

Y=      0 

Xxyzw 

=  $(1  -  Xxyzw}. 

The  answer  therefore  is  that  the  only  logical  condition  or 
determination  of  the  desired  class  is  that  it  must  not  contain 
"anything  which  is  x,  y,  z,  w,  and  which  fails  to  be  X". 
Whatever  fulfils  this  condition  will  answer  the  purpose. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

ELIMINATION. 

ELIMINATION  is,  both  by  its  etymology  and  in  its  ordinary 
acceptation,  the  process  of  getting  rid  from  within  the  limits 
of  our  enquiry  of  one  or  more  of  the  symbols  with  which  Ave 
are  concerned.  The  reader  will  of  course  be  more  familiar 
with  this  term  in  mathematics  than  in  Logic.  That  the  pro- 
cess is  resorted  to  in  the  common  Logic,  however,  will  be 
very  easy  to  show;  and  therefore  in  accordance  with  the 
general  object  of  this  work,  we  will  begin  with  it  there.  We 
shall  thus  be  better  able  to  trace  the  real  nature  of  the  pro- 
cess we  propose  to  generalize,  as  the  main  characteristics  of 
the  Symbolic  system  rather  tend  to  disguise  the  substantial 
identity  between  the  rudimentary  and  the  developed  forms 
which  elimination  may  assume. 

Beginning  then  with  immediate  inferences,  look  at  the 
step  which  might  be  called  "inference  by  omitted  determi- 
nants1". When  this  is  interpreted  in  respect  of  the  extension 
or  denotation  of  the  terms  involved,  it  is  an  exact  case  in 

1  Inference  by  added  determinants  as  well  be  considered  to  constitute  a 
is  already  recognized  (e.  g.  Thomson ;  hew  judgment  as  that  introduced  by 
Laws  of  Thought,  p.  158).  But  the  adding  on  a  new  portion.  Bain  (De- 
distinction  introduced  by  omitting  a  ductive  Logic,  p.  109)  denies  that 
portion  of  the  predicate  might  just  there  is  any  inference  here. 


286  Elimination.  [CHAP. 

point,  of  a  simple  kind,  of  the  process  of  which  we  have  to 
give  an  account.  '  Men  are  rational  mortals ;  therefore  they 
are  mortals ' : — Here  we  have  omitted  the  term  'rational'  from 
our  result,  that  is,  we  have  eliminated  it.  Or  we  might  have 
omitted  the  word  'mortal',  by  saying  that  'men  are  rational'. 

So  again  the  syllogism  is  a  case  of  the  elimination  of  a 
middle  term.  Viewed  in  its  extension,  as  an  arrangement  of 
classes,  the  mood  Barbara  asserts  that  a  class  contained 
within  a  second  class  is  contained  within  the  wider  class 
which  contains  this  second  one ;  the  reference  to  this  last,  or 
middle  term,  being  omitted  from  our  result,  that  is,  it  is  eli- 
minated. The  Dictum  of  Aristotle  may  in  fact  be  regarded 
as  a  formula  of  elimination  for  the  simple  groups  of  proposi- 
tions to  which  it  applies.  This  is  obvious  enough  in  the  case 
of  the  affirmative  form  of  the  Dictum,  as  in  Barbara,  but  may 
be  seen  with  almost  equal  ease  to  be  so  also  in  the  negative 
form.  For  instance,  'No  Y  is  Z\  all  X  is  Y;  .'.  no  X  is  Z\ 
Here  we  say  that  Y  is  included  in  not-Z,  i.e.  is  a  part  of  it ; 
and  X  is  included  in  Y ;  therefore  X  is  included  a  fortiori  in 
not-Z.  On  the  view  of  terms  and  propositions  which  is 
adopted  in  our  system,  and  which  is  a  rigid  class-view,  this 
negative  form  of  the  Dictum  is  therefore  the  precise  equiva- 
lent or  formal  reproduction  of  the  affirmative  forms.  Not-JT 
and  uot-Z  are,  with  us,  classes  of  exactly  the  same  kind  and 
significance  as  those  which  we  designate  by  X  or  Z,  and  there 
is  no  difference  of  principle  in  referring  sub-classes  to  one  or 
other  of  them.  In  both  cases  the  middle  term,  or  class  which 
at  once  includes  and  excludes,  is  omitted  or  eliminated. 

Now  the  characteristic  of  this  Elimination  to  which  I 
wish  prominently  to  direct  the  reader's  attention,  as  contain- 
ing the  main  clue  to  its  significance  in  Logic,  is  this : — that 
we  have  substituted  a  broader  or  less  exact  determination  in 
the  place  of  the  one  which  was  first  given  to  us.  That  is,  we 


sill.]  Elimination.  287 

have  had  to  let  slip  a  part  of  the  meaning  of  the  data  in  per- 
forming this  process. 

That  this  is  so  in  the  case  of  the  immediate  inference  is 
abundantly  clear ;  for  the  'men'  who  were  before  identified 
with 'rational  mortals'  are  now  identified  with  an  uncertain  part 
of  the  larger  class  'rational',  or  'mortal'.  The  reason  why  it  is 
not  equally  clear  in  the  case  of  the  syllogism  is  that  the  pre- 
mises are  given  to  us  separately  instead  of  being  combined 
into  one.  That  is,  in  the  former  case  we  say  '2  is  xy,  there- 
fore (more  vaguely)  z  is  y  or  x' ;  whilst  in  the  latter  we  say 
'z  is  x,  and  x  is  y,  therefore  z  is  y\  Of  course  the  distinction 
between  mediate  and  immediate  inference  is  on  various 
grounds  important,  both  of  speculation  and  of  logical  pro- 
cedure; and  nothing  here  said  is  meant  to  gloss  over  that 
distinction  in  its  due  place.  All  that  is  now  asserted  is  that 
in  each  case  alike,  whether  there  be  one  premise  or  two,  the 
full  determination  of  z  was  xy,  and  that  consequently  the 
statement  that  it  is  simply  y  (in  other  words,  the  elimination 
of  x)  is  so  far  a  vaguer  and  less  exact  determination  of  it  than 
could  be  given  by  the  retention  of  that  term. 

This  loss  of  precision  in  the  process  of  elimination  is  the 
general  result,  but  a  certain  narrow  class  of  exceptions  can  be 
pointed  out.  When  x  and  y  are  coextensive  the  substitution 
of  one  for  the  other  leaves  the  extension  unaltered.  Thus  in 
the  elimination  of  y  from  'all  x  is  all  y,  all  y  is  all  z'  the  de- 
termination of  x  as  z  is  just  as  narrow  as  that  given  by  calling 
it  yz.  But  of  course  such  a  case  as  this  can  but  rarely  occur. 
It  is  not  generally  easy,  except  when  we  are  dealing  with 
definitions,  to  find  two  terms  thus  coextensive ;  and  the  oc- 
currence of  three  such  must  be  very  rare  indeed. 

It  will  be  understood  that  this  loss  of  precision  is  no  valid 
objection  to  the  process  of  elimination.  It  is  one  of  the  many 
characteristic  distinctions  of  the  class- explanation  of  proposi- 


288  Elimination.  [CHAP. 

tions  to  call  attention  to  the  fact  that  there  is  any  such  loss 
at  all.  On  the  common  explanation  we  only  think  of  the 
major  term  in  its  capacity  of  a  predicate,  and  we  want  to 
know  whether  or  not  it  is  to  be  attached  to  the  subject.  The 
middle  term  is  used  presumably  merely  as  a  means  toward 
deciding  this  fact,  and  when  it  has  answered  its  purpose  it  is 
very  properly  dropped  from  notice.  We  only  wanted  to  prove, 
say,  that  x  is  z ;  to  insist  upon  it  that  x  is  yz,  though  very 
true,  may  be  a  needless  trouble.  The  very  words  Discourse 
and  Discursive  reasoning  seem  to  point  to  this.  We  let  the 
mind  run  from  one  thing  to  another ;  and  we  only  dwell 
finally  upon,  and  put  into  our  conclusion,  the  particular  fact 
or  facts  which  we  happen  to  need.  We  distinctly  want  to  get 
rid  of  the  middle  terms,  and  not  to  carry  all  our  knowledge 
about  in  our  predicate.  It  is  of  the  essence,  on  the  other 
hand,  of  the  Symbolic  system,  to  keep  prominently  before  us 
every  one  of  the  classes  represented  by  all  our  terms  and 
their  contradictories.  Accordingly  the  distinction  between 
yz  and  z,  and  the  fact  that  the  latter  must  generally  speaking 
be  a  broader  and  looser  determination,  is  much  more  promi- 
nently set  before  us  here. 

The  fact  is  that  here,  as  in  various  other  directions,  the 
associations  derived  from  the  mathematical  employment  of 
the  term  are  apt  to  be  somewhat  misleading.  For  one  thing 
we  are  accustomed  to  believe  that  there  must  be  some  con- 
nexion between  the  number  of  equations  set  before  us,  and 
the  number  of  terms  involved  in  them,  for  the  purpose  of  eli- 
mination ;  so  that  one  term  demands  for  its  elimination  two 
equations,  and  so  forth.  In  Logic  on  the  other  hand  we  know 
that  the  number  of  statements  into  which  we  throw  our  data 
is  very  much  of  our  own  choosing,  a  single  logical  equation 
admitting  of  equally  ready  statement  in  the  form  of  a  group 
of  several.  Accordingly  the  number  of  equations  at  our  com- 


XIIL]  Elimination.  289 

mand  in  no  way  affects  the  question  of  the  possibility  of  elim- 
ination here.  Then  again,  as  regards  the  loss  of  precision, 
in  mathematics  it  is  rather  the  other  way.  If  we  have  three 
equations  connecting  x,  y,  z,  each  of  these  may  be  conceived 
to  represent  a  surface,  which  is  satisfied  by  a  doubly  inde- 
finite number  of  values  of  these  variables.  But  if  I  eliminate 
y  and  z,  I  obtain  one  or  more  determinate  values  of  x  corres- 
ponding to  the  particular  points  where  the  surfaces  intersect. 
We  have  gained,  in  the  process  of  elimination,  an  increase  of 
definiteness  which  must  be  estimated  as  one  of  kind  rather 
than  of  degree. 

What  we  have  now  to  do  is  to  see  how  the  logical  process 
which  has  been  illustrated  in  one  or  two  simple  instances 
can  be  generalized.  As  an  easy  example  begin  with  the 
following, — 

w  =  xy  +  xz 

and  suppose  we  are  asked  to  eliminate  y  from  it.  As  an 
equation  its  significance  is  plain  enough.  It  is  nothing  else 
than  a  definition  or  description  of  w  in  terms  of  x,  y,  and  z. 
Any  one  therefore  who  knows  the  meaning  of  these  terms,  or 
the  limits  of  the  classes  for  which  they  stand,  will  have  all 
the  information  which  they  can  furnish  him  as  to  the  meaning 
and  limits  of  w.  Assuming  that  we  are  confined  to  the  use 
of  the  three  terms  x,  y,  z,  then  w  is  as  precisely  determined 
as  circumstances  permit. 

This  being  so,  what  could  be  meant  by  'eliminating'  y 
from  the  equation  ?  If  we  are  not  to  retain  it  there,  and  are 
not  to  introduce  some  new  equivalent  for  it,  the  only  remain- 
ing course  is  to  do  as  well  as  we  can  without  it.  But  it 
cannot  be  simply  omitted ;  for  this  would  be  inaccurate, 
unless  we  took  care  to  indicate  somehow  that  we  had  dis- 
pensed with  it.  Apparently,  therefore,  all  that  is  left  for  us 
to  do  is  to  take  refuge  in  the  vague,  and  to  substitute  for  y, 
v.L.  19 


290  Elimination.  [CHAP. 

wherever  it  occurs,  some  such  word  as  'some'.    If  we  did  this 
we  should  just  write  the  equation  in  the  form 


or  w  =  $-x  +  xz  .....................  (1). 

This  method  of  elimination  has  at  least  the  merit  of 
frankness.  It  points  out  where  we  have  let  go  some  of  the 
determining  elements,  and  it  indicates  exactly  the  nature  and 
amount  of  the  oonsequent  introduction  of  vagueness.  There 
is  another  equivalent  form  to  this  without  the  same  merit  of 
straightforwardness,  which  consists  in  writing  the  altered 
equation  thus  : 

w  =  wx  +  xz. 

The  objections  to  this  form  have  been  already  noticed.  It 
disguises  the  real  vagueness  under  a  show  of  information  ; 
and  offers  us  an  implicit  equation  involving  w,  for  the  explicit 
description  of  w  with  which  we  started,  and  which  we  wish 
as  far  as  possible  to  retain. 

Nothing  could  better  show  the  nature  of  logical  elimina- 
tion than  this  simple  example.  The  term  y  was  one  of  the 
elements  employed  in  the  determination  of  w;  hence  its 
abandonment  will  necessarily  entail  some  loss  of  precision. 
If  we  were  dealing  with  real  equations  of  the  mathematical 
type  such  loss  would  generally  be  fatal  to  the  value  of  our 
conclusion.  But  what  we  have  to  do  with  in  Logic  is  rather 
the  subdivision  of  classes  by  other  class  terms,  and  the  iden- 
tification of  a  group  of  individuals  under  different  class 
designations.  Hence  the  letting  slip  of  one  of  our  class  terms 
will  only  refer  us  to  a  somewhat  vaguer  and  wider  class  than 
that  with  which  we  started.  The  relinquishment  of  y  does 
not  destroy  all  our  knowledge  of.w,  but  it  certainly  destroys 
a  part  of  it. 

If  the  only  logical  statements  with  which  we  were  concerned 
were  of  this  simple  type  —  in  which  we  have  a  term  standing 


xiii.]  Elimination.  291 

by  itself  on  one  side,  with  a  description  or  definition  of  it  on 
the  other,  —  no  other  plan  of  elimination  would  be  necessary. 
But,  as  the  reader  knows,  we  have  to  encounter  much  more 
complicated  statements  than  this,  viz.  those  in  which  every 
term  is  implicitly  involved.  So  we  must  look  out  for  some 
more  general  mode  of  elimination.  We  should  best  seek  for 
it  in  the  alternative  negative  interpretation  of  our  propositions. 
We  know  that  every  logical  equation  can  be,  thrown  into  the 
shape  of  a  number  of  distinct  and  peremptory  denials,  without 
any  loss  whatever  or  variation  in  its  significance. 

Take  then,  to  begin  with,  the  same  statement  as  before 
and  look  at  it,  for  comparison,  in  the  light  of  what  it  denies. 
Adopting  the  plans  described  in  former  chapters,  we  find  that 
it  may  be  thrown  into  the  form  of  the  five  following  denials  ;  — 

wxy\  wxy\  =  Q 

wxz  f  =  0.      wxz) 

wyz\ 

(At  least  this  is  what  we  should  get  by  resorting  to  the  plan 
of  looking  out  for  suitable  factors,  described  in  the  last 
chapter,  and  which  is  generally  the  simplest  plan  in  practice. 
As  they  thus  stand  they  are  not  in  their  ultimate  form,  nor 
are  they  perfectly  independent  ;  but  of  this  more  presently.) 

Now  setting  before  us  the  same  aim  as  in  the  preceding 
example,  viz.  of  determining  w  as  well  as  we  can  without 
making  use  of  y,  the  course  we  should  naturally  adopt  would 
be  this;  —  we  should  just  omit  those  amongst  the  above 
denials  which  involve  y  or  y,  retaining  only  the  remainder 
which  do  not.  If  we  did  so.  the  result  of  the  elimination 
would  stand  thus  ; 


That  this  form  is  the  precise  equivalent  of  (1)  is  easily 
seen.     For   multiplying  both  sides  of  (1)  by  xz  and  w,  it 

19—2 


292  Elimination.  [CHAP. 

resolves  into  these  denials  and  into  no  other  unconditional 
ones.  Similarly  on  combining  and  developing  (2)  we  have 
w  =  xz  +  %x  as  in  (1). 

These  two  simple  methods  of  elimination  are  therefore 
precisely  equivalent,  at  any  rate  in  this  instance.  The  only 
difference  between  them  is,  that,  whereas  the  original  deter- 
mination of  w  was  complete  and  accurate,  No.  (1)  retains  as 
far  as  possible  the  same  form,  marking  plainly  the  position 
and  limits  of  the  lacunae  of  information  caused  by  the  loss  of 
y,  whilst  No.  (2)  contents-  itself  by  giving  the  materials  for 
this  latter  statement,  leaving  their  solution  to  be  worked 
out. 

Take  again  such  a  case  as  the  following  : — 

w  =  xyz  -f-  sryz  +  xyz 

in  which   w  is  declared   to   comprise   'those  things   which 
possess  two,  and  two  only,  of  the  attributes  denoted  respec- 
tively by  x,  y,  z '.     Let  it  be  required  to  eliminate  y,  a  term 
(be  it  observed)  which  enters  into  every  element  of  w. 
Form  No.  (1)  would  express  the  result  off-hand1  as 

w  =  %xz  +  %xz  -f  %xz 
or  w  =  $x-r  $xz (1) 

a  result  in  which  we  have  had  to  depart  a  good  way  from  the 
original  determination.  All  that  we  can  substitute  for  that 
determination  without  appeal  to  y,  being,  that  'w  is  contained 
somewhere  within  the  limits  of  a?  and  z' : — that  is,  there  is  cer- 
tainly no  w  outside  that  boundary. 

The  other  form  would  have  led  to  the  denials  involved  in 
the  equation,  and  the  selection  of  those  amongst  them  which 

1  In  accordance  with  what  has  are  tho  same,  so  that  1—$  is  the  same 
been  pointed  out  more  than  once  we  as  J  when  used  as  a  symbol  of  in- 
must  write    I    for  y  as  well  as  for.  dofinitencss.     Each   is   entirely  un- 
y.    For  the  limits  of  indefiniteness  certain  between  0  and  1. 
of  any  term  and  its  contradictory 


XIIL]  Elimination.  293 

do  not  make  use  of  y.  There  is  a  very  simple  way  of  effect- 
ing this  in  practice.  Instead  of  using  all  the  factors  which 
will  disintegrate  the  given  equation,  and  then  selecting  only 
the  elements  we  want,  we  had  better  only  make  use  of  those 
factors  which  we  see  will  produce  these  latter.  Thus,  here, 
x  and  z  would  make  xyz  vanish  but  not  the  other  two  terms  ; 
x  and  ~z  will  make  the  second  vanish,  and  x  and  ~z  the  third. 
The  only  factors  therefore  that  will  make  all  the  three 
y-terms  disappear  will  be  xz.  Hence  the  only  elementary 
denial  which  can  be  found  without  involving  y  will  be 

vixz  =0  ...........................  (2) 

and  this  is  the  required  elimination.  As  in  the  former  case 
it  may  readily  be  shown  that  these  two  results  are  precisely 
equivalent  and  deductively  interchangeable. 

Before  pointing  out  the  practical  or  theoretical  defects  of 
these  methods  it  will  be  worth  while  to  apply  them  to  a  group 
of  statements.  As  already  insisted  on,  there  is  no  distinction 
of  principle  between  the  information  conveyed  by  one,  and  by 
a  number  of  statements,  but  the  striking  difference  in  this 
respect  between  the  logical  and  the  mathematical  calculus 
deserves  emphatic  notice. 

Take  the  following  :  — 

(Every  w  is  either  x  and  y,  or  z  and  not  x. 
(Every  w  is  either  x,  y,  and  z,  or  neither  x  nor  z. 

In  symbols  they  stand  thus 


Let  it  be  required  to  eliminate  y  from  these  two  state- 
ments. 

The  simplest  plan  would  be  to  multiply  the  two  together, 
when  we  get  w  —  ^xyz.  Substitute  $  for  y,  and  remember 
that  £  x  £  =  £,  (for  no  such  multiplication  can  alter  the  range 


294  Elimination.  [CHAP. 

of  indefiniteness  of  the  symbol)  and   we  have  w  with  the 
desired  elimination 

w  =  $xz. 

If  we  had  begun  by  eliminating  separately  from  each,  we 
should  have  had 

=  $(#  +  xz) 
=  %(xz  +  xz) 

the  combination  of  which  would  lead  to  the  same  result  as 
above. 

Or  had  we  broken  them  up  into  their  respective  denials, 
and  added  these  together,  we  should  have  been  led  to  the 
following  (omitting  those  which  involve  y) 
wxz  -+•  wxz  +  wxz  —  0 

which  leads  again  to 

w  =  $xz. 

If  all  examples  resembled  the  simple  ones  discussed  above 
we  should  need  no  other  methods  of  elimination  than  those 
just  described.  But  the  former  method  is  only  properly 
available  when  we  are  dealing  with  equations  of  an  explicit 
kind;  so  that  if  our  statements  were  not  originally  in  that 
shape  we  should  have  to  reduce  them  to  it.  As  regards  the 
second  there  is  a  cause  of  possible  failure,  unless  we  are  on 
our  guard,  which  will  deserve  a  little  closer  notice.  It  is 
beautifully  provided  against  in  Boole's  symbolic  formula  to 
be  explained  in  the  next  chapter. 

The  difficulty  arises  as  follows.  We  have  given  directions 
to  break  up  the  equation  into  its  ultimate  denials,  and  then 
to  select  those  amongst  them  which  do  not  involve  the  term 
to  be  eliminated.  And,  in  the  examples  which  we  took,  such 
terms  presented  themselves  at  once.  But  it  is  easily  seen 
that  none  such  may  be  found ;  in  fact,  if  we  have  developed 
every  element  to  the  utmost  extent,  none  such  can  be  found, 
for  every  term  will  then  have  been  subdivided  into  its  y  and 


xiii.]  Elimination.  295 

not-y  parts.  Thus  in  the  example  on  p.  291  we  had  wxz  =  0, 
wxz  =  0,  which  did  not  involve  y,  and  we  chose  them  accord- 
ingly. But  if  these  had  presented  themselves,  as  they  might, 
in  the  forms  wxzy  =  0,  wxzy  =  0,  wxyz  =  0,  wxyz  =  0,  there 
would  have  been  apparently  no  terms  free  from  y. 

We  have  therefore  to  amend  our  rule.  "We  must  say  that 
the  complete  results  of  the  elimination  of  any  term  from  a 
given  equation  are  obtained  by  breaking  it  up  into  a  series  of 
independent  denials,  and  then  selecting  from  amoDgst  these 
all  which  either  do  not  involve  the  term  in  question,  or  which 
by  grouping  together  can  be  made  not  to  involve  it.  Of  course 
this  latter  enquiry  may  sometimes  involve  a  little  trouble, 
when  the  elements  in  question  are  numerous,  but  generally 
we  can  see  our  way  through  it  easily  enough.  So  understood, 
the  rule  for  elimination  in  Logic  seems  complete.  I  have 
preferred  to  begin  by  discussing  a  rule  the  logical  meaning  of 
which  is  clear  at  every  step,  but  in  the  next  chapter  we  shall 
examine  a  rule  of  very  remarkable  symbolic  neatness  and 
ingenuity,  invented  by  Boole. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

THE  EXPRESSIONS  /(I)   AND  /(0)». 

THE  expressions  /(I)  and  /(O)  are  presumably,  to  the  bulk 
of  logicians,  the  most  puzzling  and  deterrent  of  all  the 
various  mathematical  adaptations  of  which  Boole  has  made 
use  in  his  system.  They  play  far  too  prominent  a  part 
however  in  that  system  to  admit  of  neglect  ;  and  indeed  on 
their  own  account  they  deserve  careful  study,  as  the  effort  to 
detect  the  rational  logical  significance  of  such  very  abstract 
symbolic  generalizations  as  these  seems  to  me  one  of  the 
most  useful  mental  exercises  which  the  subject  can  afford. 
And  that  these  peculiar  expressions  are  really  nothing  more 
than  generalizations  of  very  simple  logical  processes  will  soon 
be  made  manifest. 

Wo  will  examine  these  expressions  under  two  heads; 
firstly  as  mere  class  symbols,  and  secondly  as  representative 
of  logical  equations.  That  is,  we  will  begin  by  taking 
them  as  derivatives  of  /  (#),  and  secondly  as  derivatives  of 


1  The  merely  logical  reader  will      essential    to  the  comprehension   of 
not  find  the  study  of  this  chapter      those  which  follow. 


xiv.]  The  Expressions  f  (1)  and  /(O).  297 

I.  In  order  to  put  an  interpretation  upon  /(I)  and/(0) 
we  need  only  recall  what  the  more  general  expression  f  (x}, — 
of  which  these  are  merely  specialized  or  altered  forms, — stands 
for.  In  Logic,  at  any  rate,  we  have  always  insisted  upon 
certain  restrictions  as  to  its  form  and  significance.  With  us 
it  always  stands  for  a  class,  actual  or  potential,  directly  or 
inversely  determined ;  and  wp  recognize  no  form  of  it  incon- 
sistent with  such  interpretation.  Moreover  as  a  class  expres- 
sion, we  may  insist  upon  its  possessing  certain  characteristics 
which  have  often  been  described.  These  amount  to  the 
condition  that  in  whatever  shape  it  might  originally  present 
itself  it  must  be  capable  of  being  arranged  as  the  sum  or 
aggregation  of  a  series  of  mutually  exclusive  terms,  for  thus 
only  will  it  strictly  represent  a  logical  class.  If  we  had 
ourselves  written  down  this  f(x)  as  the  symbolic  translation 
of  a  verbal  description,  then  we  ought  to  have  taken  care  so 
to  express  it;  whilst  if  it  had  been  got  at  by  logical  processes, 
such  as  development,  from  legitimate  data,  it  must  certainly 
retain  those  characteristics.  Accordingly  we  shall  assume 
thaty(^)  is,  or  may  be  exhibited  as,  the  sum  of  a  series  of 
mutually  exclusive  logical  class  terms. 

Take  then,  as  an  expression,  fulfilling  these  conditions, 

xz  -f  xy  +  wyz 
and  calling  this  f  (#),  examine  the  significance  of /"(I)  and 

/(O). 

Symbolically,  of  course,  the  answer  is  prompt  enough. 
Write  1  for  x  all  through,  and  we  have  /  (1)  =  z  +  wyz ; 
write  0  for  x  all  through,  and  we  have  f(0)  =  y  +  wyz. 
But  what  we  want  is  the  logical  interpretation.  To  obtain 
this  it  is  only  necessary  to  remember  that  xz  means  lz  re- 
stricted by  a;',  and  xy  means  'y  restricted  by  not-#'.  But  1 
means  "the  whole  of",  so  that  the  substitution  of  1  for  #  is 
merely  the  direction  to  take  the  whole  of  z  instead  of  merely 


298  The  Expressions  /(I)  and  /(O).  [CHAP. 

the  axpart  of  it1.  Similarly  0  meaning  "none  of",  the  substi- 
tution of  1  for  x,  in  xy,  tells  us  to  take  no  y  instead  of  the 
not-x  part  of  it.  Hence  the  exchange  of /(I)  for  f(x)  is 
only  the  highly  generalized  symbolic  direction : — Go  through 
the  given  class  expression  ;  and  of  every  element  of  it  which 
is  limited  by  x  take  the  whole,  and  of  every  element  limited 
by  not-#  take  none,  and  let  the  terms  which  do  not  involve  x 
or  x  remain  unaltered. 

This  indicates  the  equally  simple  logical  explanation  of 
/(O).  The  latter  expression  is  in  a  way  the  exact  parallel 
of  /(I);  that  is,  whatever  we  there  did  with  #  we  here  do 
with  not-#,  and  vice  versa.  Hence  what  we  are  directed  to 
do  is  to  secure  that  every  term  that  involves  x  shall  just 
be  dropped  out,  that  every  term  which  involves  not-# 
shall  be  taken  in  its  full  extent  instead  of  under  this 
restriction,  and  that  every  term  independent  of  x  shall  be 
simply  let  alone. 

In  the  above  explanation  we  have  implied  that  there  may 
be  terms  in  our  expression  which  do  not  involve  either  x  or 
not-tf.  But  this  need  not  be  so,  and  if  the  expression  were 
fully  developed  it  could  not  be  so,  for  every  term  would  then 
be  divided  respectively  into  its  x  and  its  not-#  part.  The 
term  wyz  is  so  put  for  simplicity  merely,  it  is  really  equiva- 
lent to  vyyz  (x  -f  x).  When  therefore  any  logical  class  expres- 
sion is  completely  broken  up  into  its  ultimate  elements  all 
these  will  fall  into  two  ranks,  those  of  x  and  not-#.  The 
verbal  statements  of /(I)  and /(O)  then  become  simplified. 
The  former  says,  Take  the  ^-members  unconditionally,  and 

1  The  reader  will  remember  the  restriction  from  xz  and  we  have  x: 

distinction  between  this  mere  taking  but  the  inverse  to  xz,  i.e.  the  class 

off  the  restriction  of  x,  by  turning  xz  which  will  become  xz  when  the  con- 

into  z,  and  the  true  inverse  operation  dition  of  x  is  imposed  upon  it,  is 

to  its  imposition.    Restrict  x  by  z  of  course  xz  +  %xz. 
and  we  have  simply  xz :  take  off  this  x- 


xiv.]  The  Expressions  f  (I)  andf(0).  299 

discard  those  which  are  not-# :  the  latter  says,  Take  the 
a;-members  unconditionally,  and  discard  those  which  are  x. 

We  will  now  proceed  to  examine  the  relation  of  these 
expressions, /(I)  and/(0),  to  one  another.  It  might  perhaps 
be  hastily  inferred  that  they  are  complementary  to  one 
another,  so  that  they  should  be  mutually  exclusive  and 
should  together  make  up  f(x); — that  is,  that 

/(I)  +/(0)  =/(*),  and  /(1)/(0)  =  0. 

Closer  observation  however  will  show  that  neither  of  these 
results  need  be  the  case,  and  that  the  former  certainly 
will  not;  but  it  will  be  well  to  discuss  these  relations  in 
detail,  as  they  have  an  important  bearing  upon  the  problem 
of  Elimination. 

Suppose  then  that  f(x)  takes  the  form  A  x  +  Bx,  where 
A  and  B  are  combinations  involving  y,  z,  and  the  other  class 
terms  which  enter  into  the  given  expression.  We  know  that 
f(x)  must  be  representable  thus,  for  when  expanded  fully  it 
can  only  yield  x  and  not-x  terms,  and  the  factors  of  these 
terms  can  only  be  composed  of  various  combinations  of  the 
other  class  terms.  Then  /(I)  =A,  and  f(Q]=B;  that  is, 
f(i)  is  the  whole  class  which  we  have  to  restrict  by  x, 
and  /(O)  the  whole  class  which  we  have  to  restrict  by 
not-#. 

What  then  are  the  limits  as  to  class  extension  of  A  and 
B  ?  None  necessarily,  except  that  they  must  conform  to  the 
fundamental  law  of  logical  classes,  viz.  that  they  cannot 
either  of  them  exceed  unity.  In  the  extreme  limiting  case 
of  A  and  B  being  both  equal  to  1,  we  should  then  have 
taken  the  whole  of  x  and  the  whole  of  not-ar,  so  that  our 
f(x)  would  have  itself  to  equal  1.  That  is,  when  /(I)  and 
/(O)  each  equal  1,  then/(#)  =  1.  (Thus  let 

f(x)  = 


300  The  Expressions  f  (1}  and  /(O).  [CHAP. 

then  /(I)  =  y  -f  y  =  1,  /(O)  =  y  +  y  =  1.)  Au  intermediate 
case  is  when  A  +  B  =  1,  that  is,  when  the  aggregate  of  the 
factors  of  x  and  x  together  make  up  the  universe.  In  this 
case,  since  /(I)  +/(0)  =  !,/(!)  and/(0)  are  the  contradictory 
opposites  of  one  another.  (Thus  let 

f(x)  =  x(yz  +  yz}  +  x(yz  +  yz}  ; 
then  f(l}=yz  +  yz  and  /  (0)  =  T/.Z  +  1/2,  so  that 


We  gather  then,  that  given  f(x}  as  a  correct  class  group, 
f(l}  and  y*(0)  may,  as  regards  the  extent  of  ground  they 
occupy,  just  make  up  between  them  the  whole  universe. 
But  they  may  also  in  one  direction  shrink  both  of  them  to 
zero  (in  which  case  f(x)  =  0),  or  in  the  other  direction 
extend  till  both  are  unity  (when/(#)  =  1).  What  they  do  in 
this  way  depends  entirely  upon  the  aggregate  extent  of  those 
class  groups  which  were  limited  respectively  by  x  and  x  in 
order  to  produce  f  (x). 

Similarly  as  regards  the  product  of  these  expressions,  viz. 
/(I)  /(O).  Its  value  depends  upon  the  mutual  relation  of 
these  aggregate  class  factors  of  x  and  x  in  the  subdivision  of 
f(x).  In  the  intermediate  case,  when  A  +B=  1,  of  course 
AB  =  0.  (Thus  when/(;r)  =  a  (yz  +  yz}  +  x  (yz  +  yz),  clearly 
/  (  1  )  f  (0)  =  (yz  +  yz)  (yz  +  yz)=  0.)  More  generally,  if  A  and 
B  are  entirely  composed  of  mutually  exclusive  elements, 
whether  or  not  these  make  up  the  universe  between  them,  — 
that  is,  if  all  those  in  A  are  exclusive  of  all  those  in  B,  —  then 
AB,  or  /(I)  /(O),  must  =0;  i.e.  /(I)  and  /(O)  aro  classes 
which  are  mutually  exclusive  of  one  another. 

We  may  sum  up  therefore  by  saying  that,  given  f(x)  as 
a  true  logical  expression  for  a  class  group,  then  /(I)  and/(0) 
will  also  represent  class  groups.  As  regards  their  mutual 
relations  to  one  another  and  to  the  original  /(#),  we  may  lay 


xiv.]  The  Expressions  f  (1)  and  f  '(0).  301 

down  the  following  conclusions  (omitting  various  limiting 
cases  which  the  reader  will  readily  work  out  with  the  help  of 
examples): — Each  of  these  expressions, /(I)  and  /(O),  will 
omit  a  portion  of  what  was  included  in  ./(#),  but  will  also 
contain  a  portion  of  what  was  not  included  in  it.  And  as  the 
portions  of  f(x)  which  they  thus  omit  will  not  be  the  same 
portion  (one  being  an  x  and  the  other  a  not-a;  portion)  it  is 
certain  that  between  them  they  must  at  least  cover  the 
whole  of  /(#),  besides  including  something  else.  That  is, 
/(I)  consists  of  the  whole  of  A,  and  /(O)  of  the  whole  of  B. 
But  /(#),  or  Ax  +  Bx,  comprises  only  a  part  (the  #-part)  of 
A,  and  only  a  part  (the  not-#-part)  of  B ;  so  that  /(I)  and 
f(Q)  must  between  them  cover  all  f(x),  and  may  cover  any 
part  of  it  twice,  besides  covering  once  or  twice  any  part  of 
what  is  not  /(#).  On  the  other  hatrid  it  is  equally  possible 
that  /(I)  and  /(O)  may  be  classes  entirely  exclusive  of  one 
another,  as  in  the  example  in  the  preceding  paragraph. 

II.  We  now  turn  to  the  far  more  important  case  of 
logical  equations.  Nearly  all  that  has  been  said  above, 
however,  will  hold  good  in  this  case,  for,  as  the  reader  knows, 
every  logical  equation  can  be  expressed  in  the  form  of  a  class 
group  of  a  peculiar  kind.  That  is,  it  may  be  made  to  say 
that  a  certain  aggregate  of  classes'  is,  collectively  and 
individually,  non-existent.  Of  course  this  needs  some  modifi- 
cation of  form  and  arrangement,  but  there  is  not  the  slightest 
change  or  loss  of  significance  entailed.  Take,  for  instance, 
the  statement  w  =;  xy  +  ~xz.  When  put  in  the  form 

w  —  xy  —  xz  =  0, , 

it  is  a  case  of  /(#)  =  0.  Now  though,  as  it  thus  stands,  it 
does  not  fulfil  the  conditions  assumed  above  for  f(x},  for  it  is 
not  built  up  entirely  of  the  sum  of  a  number  of  mutually 
exclusive  elements,  we  know  that  it  can  easily  be  made 


302  The  Expressions  f  (1)  amZ/(0).  [CHAP. 

to  assume  that  form.  Develop  and  rearrange  it,  and  it 
stands  thus, 

wxy  +  wxz  +  way  +  wxz  =  0, 

this  being  in  every  essential  respect,  as  regards  assertion  and 
denial,  the  exact  equivalent  of  w  =  a-y  +  xz.  The  two  are 
really  the  same  statement  differently  worded  or  arranged. 
Hence  it  is  clear  that  f(x)  =  0  is  merely  a  particular  case  of 
f(x)  ;  and  everything  that  has  been  said  above  about  the 
interpretation  of /(I)  and  /(O)  and  their  mutual  relations  to 
one  another  will  hold  good  here  also.  The  form,  and  the 
detailed  meaning,  of  a  class  expression,  are  entirely  unaffected 
by  our  having  to  add  that  it  is  known  that  no  such  class 
is  in  existence,  which  is  the  only  difference  introduced  by  the 
equational  form. 

We  are  now  in  a  position  to  understand  Boole's  rule  for 
Elimination.  This  rule  does  not  tell  its  own  tale  so  clearly 
as  the  simple  plans  offered  in  the  last  chapter,  and  in  actual 
performance  it  is  unquestionably  apt  to  prove  tedious. 
Symbolically  however  nothing  can  be  more  beautifully  neat 
and  effective,  and  the  penetrative  originality  which  enabled 
Boole  to  discover  it  is  quite  beyond  all  praise. 

The  rule  is  simply  this. — Let  y(#)  =  0  be  any  logical 
equation  involving  the  symbol  x,  then  /(1)/(0)=0  is 
the  full  expression  for  the  result  of  the  elimination  of  x 
from  it. 

This  rule  does  not,  at  first  sight,  appear  to  have  the 
remotest  connection  with  either  of  those  offered  in  the  last 
chapter,  but  a  little  consideration  will  show  that  it  is  sub- 
stantially identical  with  the  second  of  them.  It  only  differs 
in  fact  by  offering  a  methodical  formula  for  a  process  which 
we  had  partly  left  to  empirical  judgment.  We  shall  soon  see 
this  by  examination  of  an  example.  Take  the  following, 
w  =  xy  +  xz, 


xiv.]  The  Expressions  f  '(1}  and  f  '(0).  303 

and  suppose  we  want  to  eliminate  y  from  it.  We  have 
/(I)  =  w  —  x  —  xz,f(fy  =  w  —  xz,  so  that  the  rule  gives  us 

(w  —  x  —  xz)  (w  —  xz)  =  0. 
Multiplying  out,  this  reduces  to 

wxz  +  wxz  =  0, 

or  exactly  the  same  result  as  we  should  have  obtained  by 
breaking  up  the  equation  into  its  separate  denials  and  se- 
lecting those  only  amongst  them  which  do  not  involve  y. 
(These  separate  denials  were  given  on  the  preceding  page.) 

But  our  present  object  is  not  so  much  to  show  that  the 
two  methods  agree  in  their  result  as  to  explain  the  logical 
meaning  underlying  this  highly  abstract  symbolic  formula. 
This  may  readily  be  done  as  follows.  We  have  shown  that 
by  eliminating  y  is  meant  the  selection  of  those  elements 
of  denial  which  do  not  involve  y  or  y.  We  were  then  met 
by  the  difficulty  that  in  the  complete  development  every 
term  must  involve  one  or  other  of  these.  True,  but  those 
which  are  in  effect  free  from  yory  are  exactly  those  which 
involve  both  y  and  y,  for  wxz  —  wxz  (y  +  y).  Hence  all  that 
we  have  to  do  in  the  complete  development  is  to  select  those 
elements  only  which  involve  both  y  and  y.  Thus  if  the  com- 
plete development  of  f(y)  is  Ay  4-  By,  then  the  terms  really 
free  from  y  are  those,  and  those  only,  which  occur  in  both 
A  and  B,  But  the  way  of  rinding  the  elements  common  to 
both  A  and  B  is  simply  to  multiply  A  by  B.  In  other  words 
AB,  that  is,y(l)  f(Q),  is  the  symbolic  expression  for  those  ele- 
ments of  denial  which  the  equation  can  yield  free  from  y  or  y. 
And  the  statement  of  such  denial  is  as  usual  given  by  equation 
to  zero,  so  that  f(l)f(ty  =  0  is  the  precise  symbolic  state- 
ment of  that  process  which  we  have  worked  out  logically1. 

The  same  conclusion  would  follow  as  a  simple  corollary  from 

1  It  is  not  a  little  strange  to  find       Ulrici   declaring  that   after  careful 
such  a  philosophical    authority  as      Btudy  of  Boole  he  '  found  that  at 


304  The  Expressions  /(I)  and  /(O).  [CHAP. 

the  results  of  page  299.  Thus  the  development  of  f(y)  =  0 
assuming  the  form  Ay  -f  By  =  0,  and  these  being  mutual 
exclusives,  each  term  must  vanish  separately.  But  the  meaning 
of  Ay  =  0  is  that  none  of  class  A  is  y,  and  the  meaning 
of  By  =  Q  is  that  all  class  B  is  y.  Hence  no  A  is  B,  or 
AB  =  0;  that  is,  as  before, /(I)  /(O)  =  0.  (It  will  be  re- 
membered that  this  result  was  only  exceptionally  true  when 
/(I)  and /(O)  were  derived  from  a  simple  class  group  in- 
stead of  from  an  equation.)  This  expression  being  certainly 
free  from  y,  and  moreover  all  that  can  be  obtained  free  from 
it,  is  a  true  elimination  of  y. 

The  case  just  hinted  at,  in  which  /(I)  and  /(O)  happen 
to  be  exclusives,  so  that  /(1)/(0),  being  formally  =0,  will 
lead  to  no  result,  deserves  a  moment's  notice.  It  tells  us 
that  the  term  in  question  cannot  be  eliminated.  Thus  in 

xyz  +  z  =  yz  +  xyz, 

we  have,  in  trying  to  eliminate  x,  /(I)  /(O)  =  yz  x  yz  =  0 
from  which  nothing  can  be  deduced.  The  meaning  of  this 
is  that  every  term  in  the  ultimate  development  involves  x  or 
x  separately.  But  where  every  constituent  element  is  con- 
ditioned by  the  same  term  it  is  clear  that  nothing  can 
be  inferred  about  the  data  when  free  from  such  condition.  A 
more  obvious  case  of  this  is  afforded  by  the  statement 
xy=xz.  If  we  tried  to  eliminate  x  we  should  get  nothing 
better  than  $  y  =  {}  z,  from  which  nothing  follows.  The  only 
known  relation  here  between  y  and  z  being  given  under  con- 
dition of  x,  no  inference  can  be  drawn  as  to  what  relations 
there  may  subsist  between  them  in  absence  of  x. 

bottom  this  new  Logic  offered  no-  (Zeittchrift    filr    Phil,    und    phil. 

thing   new,  but  was  essentially  no-  Kritik,   1878).     One  would  like  to 

thing  else  than  a  translation  of  the  see  the  original  of  the  translation  in 

old  Formal,  that  is,  Aristotelian  the  case  of  this  formula /(I)/ (0)=0. 
Logic,  into  mathematical  formulae' 


XIV.]  The  Expressions  /(I)  and  /(O).  305 

Boole  generalizes  this  formula  of  elimination  to  embrace 
the  simultaneous  treatment  of  any  number  of  terms.  Thus 
the  formula  for  eliminating  the  two  terms  x  and  y  from. 
f(x,  y)  =  0  is 

/(I,  !)/(!,  0)/(0,  1)/(0,0)  =  0, 

and  so  on,  for  any  number  of  terms.  The  reader  who  has 
followed  the  explanation  so  far  will  without  difficulty  see  the 
requisite  logical  interpretation  here.  For  instance,  when  the 
expression  'f(x,  y)  is  fully  developed,  the  only  elements 
of  the  series  of  constituent  denials  which  can  be  exhibited 
free  from  both  a>  and  y  are  those  which  simultaneously 
involve  xy,  xy,  xy,  and  xy  (for  the  sum  of  these  =  1).  Now 
the  above  formula  of  elimination  is  nothing  but  the  logical 
rule  for  selecting  such  elements.  And  so  on  with  three, 
four,  or  more  simultaneous  eliminations. 

The  employment  of  the  peculiar  symbol  §  to  express  the 
results  of  our  elimination  of  a  term,  affords  a  convenient 
opportunity  for  making  a  few  concluding  remarks  upon 
its  significance.  It  is  of  course  a  logical  factor,  standing 
therefore  for  a  logical  term,  but  its  peculiarity  is  that  it 
stands  for  any  term  whatever  and  is  therefore  perfectly 
indefinite.  We  did  not,  it  will  be  remembered,  borrow 
it  directly  from  mathematics,  but  found  that  it  spontaneously 
presented  itself  in  certain  cases  of  the  performance  of  the 
inverse  operation  denoted  by  the  fractional  sign.  This, 
I  think,  suggests  a  caution  or  restriction  in  respect  of  its  use. 
We  ought  not  to  regard  it  as  in  any  way  dividing  any  ulti- 
mate class  subdivision  to  which  it  is  prefixed.  If  we  had  in- 
vented it  for  ourselves,  as  a  sort  of  substitute  for  the  'some ' 
of  ordinary  logic,  it  might  be  asked  why  we  should  not  prefix 
it  at  once  to  any  simple  class  term,  and  therefore  write  down 
such  an  expression  as  §  x.  The  objection  to  so  doing  is,  I  think, 
connected  with  a.  fundamental  characteristic  of  our  whole 

V.L.  20 


806  The  Expressions  /(I)  and  /(O).  [CHAP. 

scheme.  Given  a  class  term  x,  and  this  only,  we  have 
no  right  to  talk  of  a  part  of  x.  A  class,  with  us,  is  only 
divisible  by  another  class  term  ;  that  is,  given  y  also,  we  can 
at  once  contemplate  a  division  of  ac  into  xy  and  xyr  but 
we  need  the  pressure  or  suggestion  of  such  another  term 
in  order  to  do  this.  I  call  attention  to  this,  because  it  seems 
an  indication  that  this  Symbolic  Logic,  so  far  from  being 
specially  mathematical  in  the  sense  of  having  anything 
special  to  do  with  quantity,  is  in  some  respects  less  so  than 
the  common  system.  The  class  x,  say,  is  given  to  us  as 
undivided  by  any  other  class  term.  We  therefore  avoid 
talking  of  some  of  its  members,  because  to  do  so  would  be  to 
found  assertions,  not  on  mere  class  distinctions  given  purely 
by  class  characteristics,  but  on  some  kind  of  distinction  which 
had  been  got  at  by  investigating  individuals  without  the  help 
of  class  characteristics,  and  which  is  therefore  very  much  the 
Same  thing  as  proceeding  to  count  them.  At  least  it  seems 
one  step  towards  proceeding  so  to  do. 

Herein  lies  the  difficulty, — I  should  say  the  impossibi- 
lity,— of  representing  the  true  particular  proposition  by  aid  of 
§  or  any  symbolic  equivalent.  From  Boole's  vx  =  vy,  if  v  be 
indefinite,  it  is  clear  that  nothing  whatever  can  be  obtained  ; 
for  %x  =  $y  has  not  a  definite  word  to  say  upon  any  subject. 
So  this  expression  will  not  subserve  the  purposes  of  ordinary 
thought.  As  regards  Prof.  Jevons'  AB  =  AO  the  case  is 
rather  different.  Of  course  if  A  were  really  indefinite  (and 
this  it  is  sometimes  called)  the  two  expressions  would  be 
exactly  equivalent;  but  as  he  generally  terms  his  form  a 
'partial'  or  'limited  identity',  this  seems  to  point  to  another 
signification.  What  we  are  expressing  is  the  fact  that '  the  B 
which  is  A  is  the  same  as  the  G  which  is  A'.  In  this 
expression  we  must  assume  that  A  is  unknown,  as  otherwise 
we  merely  have,  not  a  particular,  but  a  convertible  universal 


xiv.]  The  Expressions  /(I)  and  /(O).  307 

of  the  type  'All  X  is  all  Y,  X  and  Y  being  complex  terms. 
Is  then  AJB  =  AC,  where  A  is  unknown,  a  fair  type  of  the 
particular  proposition  ?  I  think  not,  because  it  postulates 
that  the  members  common  to  B  and  to  C  have  some  attribute 
in  common,  such  attribute  being  probably  connoted  by  the 
term  A.  But  what  right  have  we  to  assume  that  because  there 
are  individuals  common  to  B  and  to  C,  that  therefore  these 
individuals  must  possess  some  attribute  in  common  ?  One  such 
attribute  I  admit  them  to  possess,  viz.  that  of  their  common 
membership  in  B  and  C,  but  this  would  clearly  only  yield  an 
identical  proposition1, and  we  have  no  warrantfor  insisting  upon 
any  other  such  attribute.  Hence,  although  AB  =  AC  can  be 
read  off,  as  'some  B  is  C",  it  is  not  true  that  every  'some  B  is 
C"  can  be  formulated  as  AB= A  C.  I  can  see  no  form  which  will 
cover  all  particular  propositions,  except  that  which  throws 
them  into  an  assertion  of  existence,  and  confines  itself  to 
declaring  that  there  are  IPs  which  are  C,  as  explained  in  the 
seventh  chapter. 

After  what  has  been  already  said  it  hardly  needs  repeat- 
ing that  $  is  not  the  equivalent  of  some.  Probably  the  best 
compendious  statement  of  its  significance  is  that  it  is  a  con- 
fession of  entire  ignorance  in  respect  of  the  term  to  which  it 
is  prefixed2.  If  it  be  asked  why  we  want  such  a  symbol,  the 
answer  has  been  already  given  in  the  results  of  the  Chapter 
on  Development :  viz.  that  the  comprehensiveness  of  our 

1  If   A   stands  for  the   fact  of  Hughlings : — a  little  book  with  some 
belonging  to  both  B  and   C,  then  fair  points  in  it,  but  -which  hardly 
AB  —  AC  becomes  BCB  =  BCC,  or  answers    to    its    designation),    this 
BC—  BC,  which  is  clearly  unmean-  should  not  be  said  without  a  caution, 
ing.  The  two  former  multiplications  really 

2  Though  therefore  it  is  quite  true  do  result  in  known  equality ;  in  the 
to  say  that  "either  1,  0,  or  $,  mul-  third  case  what  is  meant  is  that  our 
tiplied    into    itself,    equals    itself"  ignorance  is  equally  complete  before 
(The  Logic  of  Names,  an  introduction  and  after  the  multiplication. 

to  Boole's  Laws  of  Thought,  by  I.  P. 

20—2 


308  The  Expressions  f  (1)  and  /(O).     [CHAP.  xiv. 

system,  in  which  we  frame  a  perfectly  complete  subdivision 
and  call  for  an  answer  as  regards  every  compartment  con- 
tained in  it,  necessarily  demands  the  equivalent  of  such  a 
symbol.  A  confession  of  perfect  ignorance  in  respect  of  a 
single  class,  taken  by  itself,  has  no  significance ;  but  the  same 
confession  in  reference  to  one  or  more  remaining  classes  of  an 
exhaustive  catalogue,  after  we  have  definitely  pronounced 
upon  all  the  preceding  classes,  has  a  decided  significance. 

Thus  %x  intimates  nothing;  and  xy+$x  intimates  no- 
thing in  respect  of  its  second  term.  But  make  these  expres- 
sions members  of  a  logical  equation  or  statement,  and  the 
indefinite  elements  immediately  acquire  a  certain  significance. 
Thus  z  —  $x  cannot  possibly  tell  us  whether  z  is  any  actual 
part  of  x,  but  assures  us  that  it  is  no  part  of  not-#,  and  this 
is  important.  Similarly  z  =  xy  +  %x  assures  us  that  z  is  no 
part  of  not-(xy  +  x),  which  is  by  no  means  the  same  thing  as 
informing  us  that  it  is  no  part  of  not-xy.  In  every  case  the 
indeterminate  term  represents  a  confession  of  ignorance  over 
its  whole  range,  but  to  confine  our  ignorance  within  that 
range  is  to  yield  knowledge  in  reference  to  what  is  outside  it, 
and  this  is  done  in  any  of  these  logical  equations. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

COMPLETION  OF  THE  LOGICAL  PROBLEM.     THE  SYLLOGISM. 

WE  have  now  reached  the  last  step  of  our  purely  logical 
analysis.  "We  have  shpwn  how  to  resolve  any  propositions, 
and  any  group  of  propositions,  into  all  their  ultimate  denials, 
that  is,  into  all  the  unconditional  elements  which  they  con- 
tain. This  was  the  first  step,  and  was  fully  treated  in  what 
was  said  about  Equations  and  the  Interpretation  of  Equations. 
The  next  step  was  to  show  what  could  be  done  with  a  portion 
of  these  elements ;  that  is,  how  near  we  could  attain  towards 
giving  the  full  force  of  the  propositions  in  question  by  the  use 
of  a  selection  only  of  the  total  number  of  terms  involved  in 
them.  This  was  treated  in  the  Chapter  on  Elimination. 

What  we  have  now  to  do  is  to  take  a  step  in  the  way  of 
Synthesis.  We  want  to  investigate  some  rule  for  determining 
the  value  of  new  groups  of  these  elements  in  terms  of  the 
given  class  symbols.  The  full  symbolic  statement  of  the  pro- 
posed step  would  be  this; — Given  f1(x,y^,...'},fi(x,y^y...)t  &c, 
determine1  F(x,  y,  #,...)  in  terms  of  any  assigned  selection  of 

1  This  F  (x,  y,  <fcc.)  may  involve  function  of  the  class  terms,  but  a 
any  selection,  of  course,  of  the  terms  new  function  of  a  selection  of  them. 
x,  y,  &G.  It  is  not  only  a  new 


310  Completion  of  the  Logical  Problem.  [CHAP. 

the  remaining  symbols.     A  special  case  of  this  process  may 

be  detected  in  that  generalization  of  the  syllogistic  process 

already  referred  to   amongst  the   examples  in  Chap,   xil., 

•when  we  determined  xz  from  xy  and  yz.    That  is,  we  have,- — 

for  /(#,  yy  z,  a,  c)  =  0,        xy-a  =  0, 

for  /  (or,  y,  z,  a,  c)  =  0,         yz-c  =  0. 

The  problem  is,  find  F(x,  z),  or  xz,  in  terms  of  a  and  c, 
omitting  y  from  the  conclusion ;  i.e.  eliminating  y. 

The  general  solution  of  this  problem  was  probably  first 
conceived,  and  almost  certainly  first  effected,  by  Boole.  As 
a  piece  of  formal  symbolic  reasoning  there  seems  nothing  to 
be  added  to  it  as  he  left  it,  and  it  is  a  marvellous  example  of 
his  penetration  and  power  of  generalization.  It  cannot  often 
be  the  lot  of  any  one  to  conceive  and  so  completely  to  carry 
out  such  a  generalization  in  an  old  and  well-studied  subject. 

We  will  approach  this  problem  in  the  same  way  as  we 
have  attacked  the  previous  ones,  that  is,  by  first  seeing  what 
suggestions  our  common  logical  knowledge  could  offer  towards 
the  solution  of  it.  We  will  then  turn  to  Boole's  method  of 
solution ;  the  real  logical  significance  of  which  is  by  no  means 
easy  to  grasp,  unless  we  have  thus  examined  the  matter  first 
in  a  somewhat  more  empirical  way. 

Take  the  simple  example  offered  above :  viz. 

Given     ^       k  find  xz  in  terms  of  a  and  c. 
yz  =  c) 

We  should  naturally  begin  by  breaking  up  the  given 
equations  into  all  their  ultimate  denials,  so  as  to  obtain  the 
whole  materials  for  whatever  they  can  affirm,  deny,  or  leave 
in  doubt. 

These  materials  are  the  following : — 

ax  =  0,          cy  =  0, 

ay  =  Q,          cz  =  0, 

axy  —  0,         cyz  =  0. 


XV.]  Completion  of  the  Logical  Problem.  311 

Now  develop  xz,  the  quantity  to  be  determined,  in  terms 
of  the  other  elements,  and  we  have 

xz  =  xz(acy  4-  acy  +  acy  +  acy  +  acy  +  acy  +  acy  +  acy)...(l). 

This  is,  the  reader  will  remember,  a  merely  formal  result, 
an  expression  which  must  always  hold  good.  We  shall,  so  to 
say,  materialize  it,  that  is,  bring  it  into  accordance  with  the 
assigned  data,  by  seeing  to  what  it  reduces  on  the  introduction 
of  the  above  denials.  Remove  then  from  it  all  those  ele- 
ments which,  in  virtue  of  the  given  equations,  can  be  shown 
to  vanish,  and  it  reduces  to 

xz  =  xz(acy  +  acy)  or  xz  =  $(acy  +  acy), 

or,  in  the  form  in  which  we  want  it,  in  which  xz  is  expressed 
only  in  terms  of  a  and  c,  it  would  stand 

xz  =  $ac  +  %ac (2). 

It  must  be  observed,  here,  that  the  factor  g  is  introduced 
by  a  double  right.  For  one  thing  we  want  to  eliminate  y, 
and  we  know  that  the  most  direct  way  of  doing  this  is  simply 
to  substitute  §  for  the  term  to  be  eliminated.  Then  again, 
anything  standing  in  the  form  X=  XY  is  known  to  give  an 
indefinite  value  of  X,  since  this  is  one  of  the  alternative  forms 
for  X  =  $Y.  Hence  even  if  y  had  not  been  eliminated  we 
should  have  known  that  we  had  only  got  a  result  of  the  form 

xz  =  $acy  +  fficy. 

When  equation  (2)  is  read  off  into  words,  it  stands, 
"All  xz  is  either  both  a  and  c,  or  neither  a  nor  c". 
This  answer  is  quite  correct  so  far  as  it  goes,  but  it  must , 
be  carefully  observed  that  it  does  not  go  so  far  as  it  might. 
One  side  of  the  equation  is  plain  enough,  but  not  the  other. 
We  know,  that  is,  that  xz  is  confined  to  ac  and  ac,  but  we 
do  not  know  whether  it  contains  the  whole  of  either  or  both 
of  these  terms.     It  represents  the  present  state  of  our  know- 


SI  2  Completion  of  the  Logical  Problem.  [CHAP. 

ledge  ;  with  further  knowledge  we  might  ascertain  that  one 
or  both  of  these  factors  $  must  be  converted  into  1.  In  order 
to  decide  this  point  we  should,  if  we  continued  the  same  plan, 
have  to  examine  both  the  elements  ac  and  ac  in  terms  of  xz, 
in  order  to  determine  whether  we  could  thus  partially  or 
entirely  convert  the  equation.  As  it  happens,  ac  is  very 
easily  determined.  For,  multiplying  together  the  two  origi- 
nal equations,  we  have  at  once  ac  =  xyz  =  §xz. 

Hence  it  is  clear  that  the  equation  can  be  written 

xz  =  ac  +  §ac, 

viz.  that  'all  ac  is  xz\  as  well  as  'all  xz  is  ac  or  ac'.  Again  as 
reards  ac  we,  have 


This  is  not  expressible  simply  in  terms  of  xz.  Accordingly 
we  cannot  convert  the  second  term  in  the  expression  for  xz, 
but  must  leave  the  equation  as  it  stands  above,  viz. 

xz  =  ac  +  $ac  .....................  (3). 

(The  reader  will  remember  that  this  result  is  the  same  as 
we  obtained  in  a  former  chapter  by  resort  to  what  may  be 
called  simple  geometrical  considerations  ;  that  is,  by  reference 
to  diagrams.)  -  . 

Let  us,  for  further  illustration,  vary  the  example  by 
making  it  a  trifle  more  complicated.  Let  it  be  proposed  to 
determine  the  expression  xz  +  xz  from  the  same  data  as 
before  :  that  is,  let  F(x,  z)  =  xz  +  xz.  Proceeding  exactly  as 
before,  by  developing  each  of  the  expressions  xz  and  xz  in 
respect  of  the  remaining  three  terms,  and  omitting  those 
elements  which  the  original  equations  prove  to  be  non-exis- 
tent, we  have 

xz  =  xz(acy  -f  acy)  =  $ac  -f-  $ac, 
xz  =  xz(acy  +  acy)  =  gac  +  $ac.  . 


XV.]  Completion  of  the  Logical  Problem.  313 

Gathering  the  two  together,  and  remembering  that  the 
multiplication  by  2,  or  any  other  factors,  of  a  term  affected 
by  the  indeterminate  factor  §,  still  leaves  it  indeterminate, 
we  have 

F(x,  z)=a;z  +  xz  =  %ac  +  %ac  -f  $ac, 
which  is  the  required  answer. 

Here,  as  in  the  last  example,  the  answer  is  not  quite 
complete.  Of  course  it  is  possible  that  it  may  yield  all  that 
we  want,  for  we  may  have  only  wanted  to  know  the  constitution 
of  the  assigned  expression  xz  +  xz,  in  respect  of  a  and  c. 
But  if  it  were  also  required  to  know  the  converse,  or  con- 
verses, of  this  equation ;  that  is,  to  determine  whether  xz  +  xz 
included  the  whole  of  any  one  or  more  of  these  classes  ac,  ac, 
ac,  we  should  have  to  take  each  of  them  in  turn,  and  ascer- 
tain whether  either  of  the  three  was  included  in  xz  +  xz. 
We  might  proceed  to  do  this  by  the  complete  method  of 
developing  ac,  ac,  ac,  and  then  striking  out  the  terms  which 
are  proved  to  be  non-existent.  But  as  it  happens  there  is  a 
much  shorter  way,  as  follows : 

We  have  a  =  xy,  c  =  yz, 

:.  ac  =  xy(\  -  yz] 
—  xy  —  xyz  —  xy(\.  —  z)  =  xyz 

:.  ac  =  $xz. 
Similarly  ac  =  %xz. 

The  remaining  term  ac  does  not  admit  of  such  statement. 

Hence,  finally,  we  have, 

scz  +  xz  =  ac  +  ac  +  $ac, 

from  which  it  appears  that  the  proposition  may  be  converted 
as  regards  the  two  terms  ac  and  ac.  It  is  fully  stated  in 
words  by  saying,  "The  classes  represented  by  xz  and  xz  are 
both  certainly  contained  in  the  aggregate  of  the  classes  com- 
prised by  ac,  ac,  and  ac ;  and  conversely,  both  ac  and  ac  are 


314  Completion  of  the  Logical  Problem.  [cfiAP. 

contained  in  the  aggregate  comprised  by  xz  and  xz"; — or,  in 
somewhat  more  familiar  language,  'Every  xz  and  every  xz  is 
either  ac  or  ac  or  ac;  and  conversely,  every  ac  and  every  ac 
is  either  xz  or  xz '. 

The  process  above  illustrated  is  a  perfectly  general  one, 
and  if  nothing  more  were  desired  in  a  logical  process  than 
the  solution  of  the  assigned  problem,  it  would  probably  be 
the  best,  that  is,  the  most  effective  and  convenient  way  of 
setting  to  work.  It  may  be  described  as  follows,  in  a  series 
of  perfectly  intelligible  logical  steps : — Take  the  given  equa- 
tions and  analyze  them  into  all  their  constituent  elements, 
that  is,  into  all  the  ultimate  denials  which  they  involve  and 
which  collectively  make  up  their  significance.  Then  take 
the  given  function  which  we  are  told  to  find  the  value  of, 
and  make  the  requisite  synthesis.  That  is,  build  up  succes- 
sively each  part  of  it,  employing  for  this  purpose  the  above- 
mentioned  denials.  This  latter  stage  is  really  one  of  rejec- 
tion, for  we  begin  by  developing  the  required  function  into 
its  full  complement  of  potential  classes,  and  then  strike  out 
as  many  of  these  as  are  shown  to  vanish  in  consequence  of 
the  previous  analysis.  Having  thus  gone  through  the  Ana- 
lysis and  the  Synthesis  there  remains  the  third  step,  namely 
that  of  Elimination.  It  may  be  required  to  express  the 
desired  function  in  terms  of  part  only  of  the  terms  involved 
in  the  equations.  If  so,  the  elimination  is  of  that  easy  kind 
discussed  in  the  earlier  part  of  Chap,  xni.,  in  which  the  terms 
to  be  eliminated  entered  on  one  side  only  of  the  explicit 
equation.  Substitute  therefore  the  indefinite  symbol  %  for 
the  terms  to  be  eliminated,  and  the  whole  problem  is  solved, 
so  far  as  the  determination  of  the  given  function  in  terms 
of  the  assigned  class  symbols  is  concerned. 

If  we  want  also  to  go  on  to  determine  how  many  converse 
statements  can  be  made,  that  is,  to  determine  not  only  of 


xv.]  Completion  of  the  Logical  Problem.  315 

what  classes  the  given  function  is  composed,  but  also  in 
which  cases  it  comprises  the  whole  of  these  classes,  then  we 
must  go  through  the  same  processes  in  the  case  of  each  of 
these  classes.  We  must  take  each  of  them  in  turn  and  build 
it  up  in  the  same  way  as  the  given  function  was  built  up. 
The  same  list  of  elementary  denials  will  serve,  of  course,  in 
each  case,  for  we  are  dealing  with  one  and  the  same  set  of 
original  equations. 

In  familiar  language  the  process  may  be  described  by 
saying  that  we  take  the  given  premises,  break  them  up  into 
fragments,  and  then  put  these  fragments,  or  a  part  of  them, 
together  in  some  other  arrangement  in  order  to  build  up  the 
structure  we  require. 

Boole's  plan  for  attaining  this  end  is  one  which  would 
probably  seem  the  most  natural  to  any  mathematician  who 
was  disposed  to  apply  to  Logic  the  methods  found  so  success- 
ful in  his  own  science.  He  takes  the  assigned  function 
F(x,  y,  z)  and  puts  it  equal  to,  say,  t ;  where  t  is  of  course 
simply  a  new  symbol,  the  equivalent  for  this  function.  Our 
equations  then  stand  thus  : — • 

/i(»i  y>  *}  =  °> 

/$»!  y,  z)  =  o, 


Now  eliminate  from  these  equations,  after  reduction  by 
the  methods  described  in  a  former  chapter,  every  term  except 
t  and  those  terms  in  which  F(x,  y,  z)  was  to  be  determined. 
Then  develop  t,  by  the  well-known  methods,  and  what  was 
required  is  done ;  for  t  or  F(x,  y,  z)  will  be  described  in  terms 
of  those  symbols,  and  those  symbols  only,  which  it  was  desired 
to  make  use  of  in  describing  it. 

If  certainty  and  completeness  of  symbolic  procedure  were 
all  we  had  to  look  for,  there  oan  be  no  doubt  that  Boole's 


316  Completion  of  the  Logical  Problem.  [CHAP. 

method  would  be  the  best,  as  the  whole  answer  is  at  once  and 
completely  given  by  it;  that  is,  we  obtain  at  one  and  the 
same  time  the  converse  propositions  referred  to  a  page  or  two 
back,  as  well  as  the  direct  proposition  describing  F(x,  y,  z). 
But  it  is  a  terribly  long  process  ;  a  sort  of  machine  meant  to 
be  looked  at  and  explained,  rather  than  to  be  put  in  use. 
Consequently  if  ever  we  do  feel  occasion  to  solve  such  a 
problem  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  comparatively 
empirical  method  above  offered  will  answer  our  purpose  best. 
I  call  it  empirical  because  it  requires  us  to  build  up  the 
given  function  in  detail,  by  exercise  so  to  say  of  our  own 
observation  and  sagacity,  instead  of  taking,  and  trusting  to, 
a  precise  rule  for  the  purpose  of  effecting  it. 

How  tedious  Boole's  method  is  in  practice,  in  spite  of  its 
theoretic  perfection,  may  be  seen  by  taking  the  very  simple 
example  already  referred  to  ;  viz. 

Given  ^       \  find  xz. 
yz=c) 

We  should  write  them  thus  : 

xy  —a  =  01 


xz  ~t  =  O 


Then  proceed  to  eliminate  a?,  y,  and  z,  from  these  equa- 
tions and  nothing  will  be  left  but  a,  c,  and  t.  This  will  give 
therefore  an  equation  for  solving  t  in  terms  of  a  and  c,  which 
will  involve  the  required  answer.  I  should  proceed  to  do 
this  by  first  resolving  all  these  three  equations  into  their 
negative  constituents,  as  follows  ;  — 

xya\  yzc\  xzi\ 
ax>   cy\   ££>=0. 
ay]    cz\    tz) 


XV.]  Completion  of  the  Logical  Problem.  317 

The  full  formula  for   eliminating  x,  y,  and  z  from  this 
expression  would  be  rather  long  :  it  would  be  as  follows  :  — 

(a  +  c  +  i)(a  +  c  +  f)(a  +  c  +  t)(a  +  c  +  i)(a  +  c  +  t)4  =  0, 

this   being  the   result  of  the  requisite  substitutions  in  the 
formula 


the  formula  for  the  elimination  of  three  terms  fromf(x,y,z)  =  0. 
Boole  has  given  various  methods  of  reduction  for  the 
simplification  of  such  a  formula,  but  its  management  will 
always  be  tedious.  After  a  page  or  two  of  work,  -which  I 
need  not  repeat  here,  the  student  may  find  himself  brought 
to  the  result 

(ct  +  a  +  ct)(a  +  cf)  =  0, 

,  ac 

,     whence  t  — 


ac  —  ac  —  ac 

From  this,  by  the  ordinary  process  of  development,  we  have 

t  =  ac  +  $ac. 
That  is,  xz  =  ac  +  $ac. 

The  desired  result  is  therefore  obtained,  and  so  far  we  have 
an  illustration  of  the  power  and  certainty  of  the  method ;  but 
it  can  hardly  be  claimed  as  showing  also  its  ease  and  simpli- 
city. (As  regards  these  latter  qualifications  the  reader  may 
contrast  the  processes  in  Chapter  xil.  p.  279).  Of  course  what 
can  be  done  in  this  case  can  be  done  in  any  case  whatever, — 
omitting  considerations  of  mere  tediousness ; — for,  since  we 
have  no  equations  of  anything  higher  than  the  first  degree, 
every  solution  is  theoretically  obtainable  with  equal  certainty, 
and  by  the  employment  of  the  same  method. 

We  see  therefore  that  this  problem,  which  may  be 
described  as  the  most  general  problem  of  Symbolic  Logic,  is 


318  The  Syllogism.  [CHAP. 

theoretically  attainable  in  every  case,  and  the  method  for  so 
obtaining  it  has  now  been  fully  exhibited. 

THE  SYLLOGISM. 

The  problem  just  discussed  is  closely  connected  with  the 
Syllogism  of  ordinary  Logic,  of  which  indeed  it  may  (as  will 
presently  be  pointed  out)  be  regarded  as  a  generalized  ren- 
dering. We  must  frankly  remark  that  from  our  point  of 
view  we  do  not  greatly  care  for  this  venerable  structure, 
highly  useful  though  it  be  for  purposes  of  elementary  training 
in  thought  and  expression,  and  almost  perfect  as  it  technically 
is  when  regarded  from  its  own  standing  point.  But  its  ways 
of  thinking  are  not  ours,  and  it  obeys  rules  to  which  we  own 
no  allegiance.  To  it  the  distinction  between  subject  and 
predicate  is  essential,  to  us  this  is  about  as  important  as  the 
difference  between  the  two  ends  of  a  ruler  which  one  may 
hold  either  way  at  will.  To  it  the  position  of  the  middle 
term  is  consequently  worth  founding  a  distinction  upon,  to  us 
this  is  as  significant  as  is  the  order  in  which  one  adds  up  the 
figures  in  an  addition  sum. 

There  are  reasons  nevertheless  for  taking  some  account 
of  the  syllogism  here ;  partly  because  the  contrast  of  treat- 
ment will  serve  to  emphasize  this  difference  in  the  point  of 
view,  partly  because  the  omission  of  any  such  reference  might 
possibly  be  taken  as  a  confession  of  failure  on  the  part  of  the 
Symbolic  Logic.  Since  the  Syllogism  is  a  sound  process  it 
must  admit  of  some  kind  of  treatment  upon  any  scheme, 
though  we  shall  take  the  liberty  of  freeing  it  from  what  we 
are  bound  to  regard  as  certain  unnecessary  restrictions.  We 
cannot  consistently  recognize  the  differences  upon  which  the 
distinctions  of  Figure  are  founded,  so  we  look  only  at  the 
first  Figure.  Even  then  we  must  simplify  further.  Firstly, 
we  refuse  to  see  any  difference  of  character  between  x  and 


xv.]  The  Syllogism.  319 

not-x;  whereupon  vanishes  the  distinction  between  syllogisms 
with  affirmative  and  with  negative  major  premises.  Secondly, 
our  punctilious  aversion  to  anything  like  enumeration  or 
quantification,  —  in  other  words,  to  the  mathematical  conces- 
sions of  the  common  Logic,  —  induces  us  to  regard  'some  X' 
in  the  subject  of  the  major,  as  a  distributed  class-term, 
instead  of  regarding  'X'  as  an  undistributed  term.  The 
justification  for  doing  this  is  that,  when  we  look  only  to  the 
first  Figure,  precisely  the  same  indefinite  class  'some  X' 
occurs  in  the  minor  premise  and  in  the  conclusion,  so  that  its 
indefinite  character  has  no  bearing  whatever  on  the  actual 
process  of  reasoning1.  Accordingly  our  syllogistic  type  is 
reduced  to  the  one  form, 


XY=0,                or  X 

.'.XZ=0-,  .:X 

When  all  the  three  letters  here  stand  for  whole  terms, 

these  being  positive,  we  have  Barbara.     When  X  stands  for 

1  The  reader  will  remember  that  'some-X'  and  refer  it  to  a  part  of 

this  was  not  the   form   adopted  in  the  class  'not-Z  '.     But  it  is  a  per- 

Chap.  vii.  for  the  expression  of  par-  fectly  legitimate  way  of  expressing  it 

ticular  propositions.     But  the  pro-  when,  as  in  the  first  Figure,  this 

blem  before  us  in  the  two  cases  is  same  indefinite  class  'some-^'  occurs 

not  the  same.     What  we  were  there  on  each   occasion   as  one   of  three 

considering  was  the  best  way  of  ex-  terms.     When  a  Symbolist  is  forced 

pressing  the  real  force  of  such  propo-  to  syllogize,  it  is,  I  consider,  a  fair 

sitions,  in  symbolic  language  ;  taking  rendering  of  Ferio  to  put  it, 

account,  as  far  as  we  could,  of  the  All  Y  is  not-Z, 

attendant  difficulties  of  implication.  Some-X  is  Y, 

What  is  now  before  us  is  the  best  way  .'.  Some-X  is  not-Z. 

of  similarly  expressing  a  certain  pro-  We   do    not    syllogize  willingly, 

cess  of  reasoning.     I  think  that  it  is  nor  profess  to  do  it  gracefully,  but  it 

not  by  any  means  the  best  rendering  seems  to  me  that  we  do  not  do  it  in- 

Of  'Some  X  is  not  Z'  to  say  that  accurately. 
we  thus  contemplate  the  whole  class 


320  The  Syllogism.  [CHAP. 

a  part-class  (i.e.  for  some-X),  and  Z  is  a  negative  term,  we 
have  Ferio  ;  and  so  on  with  the  two  remaining  forms.  That 
is,  the  above  symbolic  arrangement  will,  by  suitable  interpre- 
tations of  X,  Y,  and  Z,  cover  all  the  Moods  of  the  first  figure, 
and  consequently  all  the  Moods  of  the  other  figures. 

The  above  rendering  of  the  syllogism,  it  will  be  seen,  is 
really  nothing  but  a  symbolic  translation  of  the  Dictum  of 
Aristotle ;  as  any  single  comprehensive  rendering  of  it  ought, 
I  suppose,  to  be.  Or  rather  it  is  a  slight  generalization  of 
that  Dictum,  for,  since  we  recognize  no  difference  of  character 
between  x  and  x,  we  make  but  one  dictum  out  of  omne  and 
nullum. 

Supposing  that  we  feel  bound  to  treat  the  syllogism  at 
all,  the  above  certainly  seems  to  me  the  best  way  of  doing  so ; 
indeed  the  only  way,  in  strict  consistency  with  our  own  prin- 
ciples. One  serious  defect,  as  it  seems  to  me,  in  the  great 
majority  of  the  attempts  to  treat  Logic  symbolically  has  con- 
sisted in  the  fact  that  the  authors  have  not  sufficiently  shaken 
themselves  free  from  the  old  trammels.  They  have  felt 
bound  to  adhere  as  far  as  possible  to  all  the  old  distinctions 
in  the  form,  order,  and  so  forth,  of  the  constituent  proposi- 
tions even  of  the  syllogism.  The  majority  of  the  older  sym- 
bolists (for  instance,  Maimon)  have  really  done  little  more 
than  go  in  detail  through  the  nineteen  moods,  clothing  each 
in  a  new  symbolic  dress.  This  is  highly  unsatisfactory,  since 
most  sets  of  symbols  require  some  violence  to  force  them  into 
recognizing  distinctions  so  utterly  alien  to  their  genius  and 
habits. 

Boole's  plan  is  very  different  from  the  one  offered  above. 
He  has  certainly  solved  a  very  general  problem,  and  one 
which  can  be  made  to  include,  amongst  other  things,  a  num- 
ber of  the  syllogistic  moods.  I  cannot  however  regard  it  as 
quite  a  fair  generalization  of  that  process;  nor,  for  that 


XV.] 


The  Syllogism. 


321 


matter,  did  he  seem  to  regard  it  so  himself.  His  plan  is  as 
follows.  He  considers  the  two  prepositional  forms,  vx  =  v'y, 
wz  =  w'y,  as  containing  under  them  all  the  possible  forms  of 
premise  needed  for  a  syllogism.  Thus,  put  v  =  1  in  vx  =  v'y, 
and  we  have  'All  x  is  y'',  leave  v  =  1,  but  regard  y  as  nega- 
tive, and  we  have  '  No  x  is  y';  make  v  and  v'  indefinite,  and 
we  have  '  Some  x  is  y';  do  the  same,  regarding  y  as  negative, 
a,nd  we  have  '  Some  x  is  not  y '.  Similarly  with  the  inter- 
pretation of  the  other  premise.  Now  eliminate  y  from  these 
two  equations  and  determine  the  relation  of  x  to  z,  and  a 
part1  of  the  syllogistic  scheme  will  be  completed. 

The  answer  obtained  by  Boole  from  these  premises,  involv- 
ing seven  terms,  is  somewhat  intricate.  It  is  given  in  the 
Laws  of  Thought  (p.  232).  I  will  not  however  pursue  the  sub- 
ject further  for  two  reasons.  In  the  first  place,  the  whole 
enquiry  seems  to  me  to  be  carried  on  upon  a  wrong  line  of 


1  Only  a  part,  on  two  accounts. 
Firstly,  in  the  propositions  as  above 
expressed,  the  same  middle  term  y 
occurs  in  both.  But,  in  the  syl- 
logism, we  require  that  'all  y'  and 
'  no  y '  shall  enter  as  a  middle  term ; 
that  is,  we  must  take  account  of  the 
pair  of  equations  vx  =  v'y,  wz  =  w'y, 
or  we  shall  omit  some  of  the  recog- 
nized pairs  of  premises.  Secondly, 
syllogistic  conclusion  demands  the 
determination  not  only  of  the  re- 
lation of  x,  but  also  of  that  of  x  and 
vx,  to  z,  or  we  shall  omit  some  of  the 
recognized  conclusions.  Consequent- 
ly the  form  above  worked  out  is  only 
one  of  six  which  demand  exami- 
nation, and  which  are  duly  discussed 
by  Boole. 

It  deserves  notice  that  Lambert 
attempted  much  the  same  problem. 
V.  L. 


Starting  from  two  perfectly  general 
expressions  for  the  premises,  he  ob- 
tains a  similar  one  for  the  conclu- 
sion, pointing  out  that  by  due  deter- 
mination of  the  arbitrary  letters  in- 
volved we  may  specialize  for  any 
desired  figure  and  mood.  His  forms 
(of  which  some  account  is  given  in 
Chap,  xx.)  are  closely  analogous  to 
those  of  Boole.  Thus, 

mA      nB 

"Major  —  =  — , 
P        1 

Minor—  =  — , 

7T  p 

,     un.,      mv    . 
Conclusio  — C  =  —  A. 
irq  pp 

In  dieser  allgemeinen  Formel  kann 
man  die  Buchstaben  nach  Belieben 
bestimmen,  wenn  man  daraus  beson- 
dere  Foimeln  fiir  die  Schliisse  her- 
leiten  will"  (Log.  Ab.  i.  103). 

21 


322  The  Syllogism.  [CHAP. 

attack,  inasmuch  as  it  involves  a  concession  to  a  variety  of 
rules  and  assumptions  which  from  our  point  of  view  must  be 
regarded  as  arbitrary  and  almost  unmeaning.  Moreover  such 
a  form  as  vx  =  v'y  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  true  representa- 
tion of  a  particular  proposition  unless  we  reject  the  value  0 
for  v  and  v,  a  restriction  which  is  not  claimed  for  x  and  y. 
Consequently  we  are  mixing  up  in  the  same  investigation 
terms  which  are  subject  to  ditferent  laws  of  valuation. 

If  we  simply  regard  v,  v,  w,  w,  as  ordinary  class  terms, 
like  x,  y,  z,  the  problem  in  question  acquires  a  very  ready  in- 
terpretation, but  one  widely  remote  from  anything  contem- 
plated in  syllogistic  Logic.  It  then  becomes,  "If  every  x 
which  is  v  is  a,  y  which  is  v  (and  vice  versd),  and  every  z 
which  is  w  is  a  y  which  is  w  (and  vice  versd},  what  is  the  de- 
scription of  x  as  given  by  the  other  terms,  omitting  y"1  A 
concrete  example  of  this  is  given  by  Boole  himself  in  the 
words  : — "  Suppose  a  number  of  pieces  of  cloth  striped  with 
different  colours  were  submitted  to  inspection,  and  that  the 
two  following  observations  were  made  upon  them ; 

(1)  That  every  piece  striped  with  white  and  green  was 
also  striped  with  black  and  yellow,  and  vice  versd. 

(2)  That  every  piece  striped  with  red  and  orange  was 
also  striped  with  blue  and  yellow,  and  vice  versd. 

Suppose  it  then  required  to  determine  how  the  pieces 
marked  with  green  stood  affected  with  reference  to  the  colours 
white,  black,  red,  orange,  and  blue ". 

If  we  are  to  take  this  kind  of  view  of  the  syllogism  at  all 
there  seems  to  me  to  be  a  simpler  and  more  symmetrical 
arrangement.  Instead  of  starting  with  the  premises  employed 
by  Boole,  let  us  make  use  of  the  following, 

ocy  =  a 
yz=  c' 


xv.]  The  Syllogism.  323 

By  suitable  modifications,  as  explained  in  Chap,  vil.,  we 
can  make  these  forms  represent  a  number  of  the  propositions 
needed  for  the  syllogism,  as  well  as  some  others  besides.  We 
have  only  to  put  a  and  c  respectively  equal  to  1,  v,  0.  This 
will  furnish  one  type  of  pairs  of  propositions,  from  which  we 
can  then  determine  xz,  xz  and  xz.  For  the  other  type  we 
must  take  a  pair  of  propositions  in  which  the  middle  term 
occurs  in  the  forms  y  and  y.  Thus, 


and  then  again  determine  xz,  xz  and  xz  from  this  pair.  The 
problem  thus  solved  is  essentially  the  same  as  that  under- 
taken by  Boole,  and  can  therefore  hardly  be  considered  to  be 
a  true  representation  of  the  syllogism,  but  it  seems  to  me 
simpler  and  more  symmetrical  than  his  rendering.  Of  the 
results,  one  or  other  of  which  represents  every  syllogistic  mood 
and  which  correspond  to  the  six  alluded  to  above,  I  give  two : 
From  the  premises 


we  deduce  xz  =  ac  +$ac  ............  (a). 

And  from  the  premises 


yz=c 
we  deduce  xz  —  ^ac+^ac  ..............  (/5). 

It  would  take  too  much  space  to  work  out  all  the  results, 
but  two  may  be  chosen  as  samples. 

(1)     In  the  premises  scy  =  a,yz  =  c,  put  z  =  w,  a  =  v,  c  =  0, 
and  we  have 

xy  =  v) 


Then,  employing  formula  (a),  we  have  xw  =  v  +  §  or  xw  =  v. 

21—2 


324  The  Syllogism.  [CHAP. 

Put  into  words  this  stands,  inverting  the  order  of  the 
premises, 

All  y  is  w\ 
Some  x  is  y\  Darii 
:.  Some  x  is  w] 

(2)     In  the  second  pair  of  premises  xy  =  a,  yz  =  c,  put 
a  =  0,  c  =  0,  and  we  have 

xy  —  0] 


Then,  employing  formula  (£),  we  have  az  =  0. 
Put  into  words  it  stands 

No  y  is  x\ 
All  £  is  y>  Celarent. 
:.  No  s  is  x] 

The  syllogistic  regulations  are  however  so  remote  from  the 
ways  of  the  symbolic  system  that  it  hardly  seems  worth  the 
trouble  to  follow  out  the  enquiry  any  further.  We  can 
syllogize,  after  a  fashion,  just  as  one  could  drive  a  stagecoach 
from  London  to  Birmingham  along  the  railroad,  but  to  do 
this  would  be  a  needless  deference  to  tradition  now  that  we  have 
engines  and  carriages  specially  constructed  for  the  new  system. 

I  take  this  opportunity  of  cor-  All  Fs  are  A"s, 

rccting  an  error,  or  rather  a  sug-  No  Fs  are  X'B, 

gestion  of  error,  in  the  note  on  p.  176.  Some  Fs  are  X's, 

It  slipped  my  memory  at  the  time  Some  Fs  are  not-A"s, 

(and  indeed  till  that  sheet  was  prin-  All  not-Fs  are  X's, 

ted  off)  that  Boole  when  discussing  No  not-Fs  are  X's, 

the  Syllogism  in  his  later  work,  the  Some  not-Fs  are  Z's, 

Laws  of  Thought,  had  not  confined  Some  not-Fs  are  not-X's. 

himself  to  the  four  old  forms  of  pro-  These  forms,  as  he  distinctly  says, 

position,  but    had    added  on    four  are  not  the  same  as  those  of  1  1  ami  1 

more,  thus  adopting  a  scheme  equi-  ton.    They  are  simply  an   enlarge- 

\iik-nt  to  that  of  De  Morgan.     Thus,,  ment  of  the  old  scheme  by  the  intro- 


XV.] 


The  Syllogism. 


325 


duction  of  negative  subjects,  and 
they  leave  the  predicate, —  as  regards 
its  quantity  or  distribution,  in  its 
customary  condition.  There  is  no 
attempt  to  distinguish  whether  we 
mean  'some  only'  or  'all'  the  predi- 
cate to  be  taken;  and  this  I  have 
always  considered  to  be  the  whole 
point  of  the  Quantification  doctrine. 
Moreover  his  whole  treatment  of  these 
forms  is  antagonistic  to  this  doctrine. 
Thus  he  here  expresses  (p.  229) 
'All  Ps  are  X'a',  in  his  usual  way, 
y  =  vx ;  but  gives  at  once,  as  equi- 
valent forms,  yx  —  0,  x  =  %  y .  These 
forms,  as  I  have  said  in  the  text  of 


the  page  referred  to,  seem  to  me 
as  directly  hostile  to  all  that  I  have 
ever  understood  to  be  meant  by  Quan- 
tification of  the  Predicate,  as  any 
forms  which  I  could  invent  for  the 
purpose  of  expressing  such  hostility. 
If  any  one  will  point  out  to  me  a 
passage  in  which  Boole  has  admitted 
the  distinctive  propositions  '  All  X  is 
some  Y',  'Some  Xis  not  some  Y',  I 
shall  admit,  not  that  his  system  is 
founded  on  the  Quantification  of  pre- 
dicates, but  that  he  has  there  used 
expressions  inconsistent  with  his 
system  of  symbols. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

HYPOTHETIC 'ALS. 

IN  the  course  of  the  preceding  chapters  we  have  frequently 
had  to  touch  incidentally  upon  the  treatment  of  Hypotheti- 
cal propositions,  both  in  the  symbolic  expression  of  our  data 
and  in  the  interpretation  of  our  results.  The  subject  how- 
ever is  too  large  and  intricate  for  merely  incidental  treatment' 
so  a  separate  chapter  is  here  devoted  to  a  more  detailed 
discussion  of  it. 

The  reader  will  have  had  repeated  opportunities  of  in- 
ferring that  the  only  tenable  symbolic  view  is  that  there  is  no 
real  distinction  between  the  hypothetical  and  categorical  forms 
of  statement,  these  distinct  renderings  being  regarded  as  a 
matter  of  private  option,  so  that  it  is  open  to  any  one  to  read 
off  the  symbols  in  whichever  way  he  pleases.  In  the  sym- 
bolic statements  themselves  there  is  nothing  to  intimate  in 
which  way  the  premises  were  worded  when  they  were  handed 
over  to  us,  nor  is  there  anything  to  force  us  to  translate  them 
back  again  into  one  form  rather  than  the  other. 

Here,  as  at  every  other  point,  we  have  to  consider  the  de- 
mands of  our  own  scheme  and  not  those  of  other  schemes. 
Doubtless  there  are  systems  of  Logic  to  which  the  distinction 


XVL]  Hypothetical.  327 

in  question  is  by  no  means  insignificant.  For  instance,  those 
who  adopt  a  more  subjective  view  of  the  nature  of  the  reason- 
ing processes  might  fairly  insist  upon  the  distinction  between 
categorical  and  hypothetical  judgments.  On  the  other  hand 
there  are  ways  of  treating  Logic  objectively, — for  example  by 
the  discussion  of  Induction, — in  which  the  distinctive  charac- 
teristic of  the  Hypothetical  brings  it  (as  will  presently  be 
pointed  out)  into  such  close  proximity  with  the  estimation  of 
Probability  as  to  entitle  it  to  distinct  consideration* 

As  just  remarked,  all  that  here  directly  concerns  us  is  the 
most  appropriate  symbolic  account  of  the  matter.  In  this  we 
must  have  regard  not  merely  to  the  fact  that  we  make  very 
large  employment  of  symbols,  but  also  to  the  character  of  the 
propositions  to  which  this  employment  introduces  us.  Now 
the  sort  of  proposition  with  which  we  constantly  have  to 
deal,  and  which  we  class  with  others  of  a  more  simple  and 
familiar  description,  is  one  wherein  the  subject  or  predicate, 
or  both,  are  complex.  Take,  as  a  type  of  this  character,  the 
statement  AB  =  ABCD.  This  may  be  read  off  in  a  variety 
of  ways  :— All  AB  is  CD  ;— If  any  A  is  B  then  it  is  CD ;— If 
any  B  is  A  then  it  is  CD ; — Every  A  which  is  B  is  a  C  which 
is  D ; — Whenever  A  concurs  with  B  then  will  C  concur  with 
D  ;  and  so  forth.  That  these  different  renderings  of  the  same 
original,  statement  involve  somewhat  different  judgments  may 
be  freely  conceded ;  and  therefore,  as  already  remarked,  on  a 
more  subjective  system  of  Logic  we  might  have  to  distinguish 
between  them.  But  it  has  been  abundantly  illustrated  in 
the  course  of  this  work  that  what  we  look  to  are  the  class  re- 
lations involved,  and  therefore  we  are  prepared  to  allow  con- 
siderable latitude  in  respect  of  the  way  of  reading  off  our 
statements,  provided  the  relations  themselves  be  left  un- 
disturbed. 

It  is  quite  true  that  logical  equations  which  involve  com- 


328  Hypotheticals.  [CHAP. 

plex  terms  are  more  naturally  interpreted  in  a  hypothetical 
form  than  are  those  of  a  simpler  kind.  Indeed,  in  a  recent 
treatise  on  Symbolic  Logic1,  the  form  xy  =  c  is  chosen  as  the 
type  of  the  Hypothetical,  as  a;  =  c  is  of  the  Categorical.  It 
•will  be  instructive  to  enquire  into  the  ground  of  this  choice. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  each  of  these  forms  can,  if  we  please, 
be  interpreted  in  either  way.  Thus  xy  =  c  may  be  read  off 
either  'All  xy  is  c',  or  'If  any  x  is  y  then  it  is  c';  whilst 
x  —  c  may  be  read  off  either  '  All  x  is  c'  or  '  If  anything  is  x 
then  it  is  c'.  Why  then  is  the  former  regarded  as  more 
appropriately  hypothetical  ?  Mainly,  I  apprehend,  for  the 
following  reason.  It  was  shown  in  a  previous  chapter  (Chap. 
VI.)  that  every  universal  affirmative  proposition  must  be  in- 
terpreted as  involving  something  of  a  hypothesis ;  'All  x  is  c' 
having  to  be  understood,  if  we  wish  to  work  with  it  success- 
fully, as  meaning  'All  x,  if  there  be  any,  is  c'.  But  this 
hypothetical  element  is  generally  so  faint  as  scarcely  to  be 
perceptible  in  common  discourse,  where  indeed  it  is  often 
entirely  rejected.  Names  are  seldom  employed  except  to 
denote  what  we  suppose  to  exist,  so  that  we  come  to  feel 
much  reluctance  to  assert  that  'All  a;  is  c'  unless  we  are  con- 
vinced of  the  existence  of  x.  Hence  any  doubt  on  this  score 
commonly  drops  out  of  sight,  and  the  categorical  is  safely 
assumed  in  most  cases  to  carry  with  it  an  assurance  of  the 
existence  of  the  subject  and  predicate.  But  though  such  an 
assurance  may  be  justified  in  the  case  of  x  and  y  separately, 

1  Macfarlane's  A  Igebra  of  Logic,  folgenden  verwechselt  werden ;  Alles 

p.  81.  •  Lambert,  so  far  as  I  know,  A  so  B  ist,  1st  C.    Nun  1st,  Alles 

was  the  first  to  explicitly  assign  this  A  so  B  ist     .-(7.1;  folglich,  Alles  .  /  /.' 

notation  for  the   expression    of    a  ist  C.  Daher  dieZeichnung:  AB>C, 

hypothetical:  —  "Die    allgemeinste  AB=mC"   (Log.   Abhandlungen,   i. 

Formel  der  hypothetischen  Sa'tze  ist  128).     Some  explanation  of  the  sym- 

diese :  Wenn  A  ein  B  ist,  so  ist  CM  C.  hols  thus  employed  will  be  found  iu 

Uif.se  Formel  kaun  allezeit  mit  der  the  final  chapter. 


xvi.]  Hypoiheticals.  329 

it  is  quite  another  thing  to  justify  it  in  the  case  of  the  com- 
pound xy.  These  symbols,  when  occurring  separately,  stand 
presumably  for  common  terms  which  are  familiar  to  every 
one,  but  their  combination  into  one  may  be  something  en- 
tirely novel.  Hence  the  enquiry  whether  there  be  any  such 
thing  as  the  subject  of  the  proposition,  which  would  seem  al- 
most impertinent  in  the  case  of  the  simple  propositions  typified 
by  x  =  c,  becomes  quite  pertinent  in  the  case  of  the  complex 
ones  typified  by  xy  =  c.  The  doubt  thus  suggested  naturally 
expresses  itself  by  our  adopting,  as  the  verbal  equivalent  of 
the  latter  form,  such  a  conditional  statement  as,  'If  x  is  y  then 
it  is  c',  the  rest  of  the  complete  statement,  indicated  by  the 
symbols,  taking  the  form  '  c  is  xy,  if  there  be  such'.  Proposi- 
tions therefore  with  complex  subjects  almost  force  upon  us 
that  hypothetical  interpretation  which  we  have  found  it 
advisable  to  extend  to  all  propositions  without  exception. 

There  are,  it  must  be  admitted,  certain  grammatical  diffi- 
culties in  this  way  of  framing  our  hypothetical  propositions, 
but  these  seem  really  common  to  all  systems  of  Logic.  Take 
as  an  example,  '  If  the  harvest  is  bad  in  England,  then  corn 
dealers  in  America  will  gain',  which  seems  a  fair  concrete 
example  of  '  If  A  is  B  then  C  is  D'.  We  have  said  (Chap, 
xu)  that  we  should  frame  this  in  the  symbolic  expression 
(1  -  AF)  CD  =  0,  or  CD  =  GDAR  This  identifies  '  G  that 
is  not  D'  with  some  uncertain  part  of  'A  that  is  not  B'\  that 
is,  literally  interpreted,  we  seem  to  be  declaring  that '  Ameri- 
can corn  dealers  who  do  not  gain'  are  '  harvests  which  are 
not  bad  in  England', 

Such  a  difficulty  as  this  ought  hardly  to  trouble  any 
logician.  It  surely  arises  only  out  of  the  impossibility  of  in- 
flecting our  literal  symbols,  which  compels  us  to  make  con- 
siderable modifications  in  the  structure  of  our  sentences 
before  submitting  them  to  symbolic  treatment.  If,  in  accord- 


330  Hypoiheticals.  [CHAP. 

ance  with  a  hint  from  De  Morgan,  we  were  at  liberty  to 
inflect  our  logical  letter  symbols  ( Camb.  Phil.  Tr.  x.  207),  if 
we  might  talk  of  the  .4-ness  of  B,  or  of  X-ing  and  F-ing  Z, 
and  so  forth,  we  should  need  less  freedom  of  interpretation. 
As  it  is,  the  great  license  of  interpretation  which  we  are 
obliged  to  claim,  is  nothing  but  a  set  off  for  the  absence 
of  power  to  inflect.  Every  logician  claims  this  license. 
Just  as  we  do  not  hesitate  to  transform  'A  killed  B  unjustly', 
into  'A  is  the-unjust-killer-of-.fi',  and  thus  to  express  it  in 
.the  form  '  X  is  Y',  so  we  claim  a  like  liberty  as  regards  the 
.above  hypothetical.  We  transform  the  sentence  into  some 
such  shape  as  'Bad  English  harvests  are  followed  by  gain  to 
American  corn  dealers',  and  put  it  symbolically  (1  —  AB)  CD=0. 
This  intimates  correctly  enough  that  when  the  English  har- 
vest is  bad  (AB  =  0,orA  is  B)  then  gain  accrues  to  American 
corn  dealers  (  CD  =  0,  or  C  is  D}.  We  must  of  course  insist 
that  no  alteration  be  made  in  the  signification  of  the  symbols 
during  the  process  of  reasoning,  but  we  fairly  claim  a  large 
license  in  the  statement  of  our  data  and  the  interpretation  of 
our  results,  so  as  to  mould  our  verbal  statements  in  such  a 
way  that  our  symbolic  expressions  shall  be  able  to  grapple 
with  them.  All  that  is  necessary  to  secure  is,  not  merely 
that  the  substance  of  the  given  sentence  shall  be  preserved 
intact,  but  also  that  the  four  component  elements  in  it  (cor- 
responding here  to  A,  B,  C,  D)  shall  also  be  retained  distinctly. 
Provided  that  he  does  this,  the  logician  has  performed  all 
that  can  be  expected  of  him. 

Having  thus  explained  the  view  as  to  the  nature  of  Hypo- 
theticals  which  seems  most  appropriate  to  the  Symbolic 
Logic,  some  remarks  ought  to  be  added  in  the  way  of  criti- 
cism and  explanation  of  the  popular  account  of  them1.  It  is 

1  I  must  again  remind  the  reader      volved  in  such  an  enquiry:  viz.  the 
of  the  three  very  distinct  topics  in-      explanation    most    suitable   to   the 


XVI.]  .Hypothetical*.  331 

all  very  well  for  our  purposes  to  say  that  we  shall  insist  upon 
treating  them  exactly  as  we  treat  Categoricals,  but  we 
cannot  disguise  the  fact  that  this  is  not  the  popular  view. 
And  since  popular  phraseology  is  not  used  at  random,  the 
wide  prevalence  through  so  many  languages  of  a  distinct 
hypothetical  form,  indicates  beyond  question  the  existence  of 
some  tolerably  distinct  class  of  facts  for  which  that  form  is 
considered  the  most  appropriate.  It  is  important  on  two 
grounds  to  determine  what  these  facts  may  be ;  partly,  in 
order  to  ascertain  that  our  system  does  not  overlook  any 
really  essential  distinction,  and  partly  as  a  preparative  to 
noticing  certain  interesting  extreme  cases  which  symbolic 
consistency  forces  into  prominence. 

Briefly  put,  my  own  view  as  to  the  true  significance  of  the 
hypothetical  form  is  best  expressed  by  saying  that  it  (1) 
implies  a  connection,  of  the  kind  called  a  uniformity,  between 
two  or  more  phenomena ;  and  (2)  implies,  along  with  this, 
some  doubt  on  our  part  as  to  the  actual  occurrence,  in  a  given 
instance,  of  the  pair  or  more  of  events  which  compose  this 
uniformity.  In  other  words,  when  we  feel  tolerably  sure  that 
we  have  got  hold  of  a  true  connection  between  certain  events, 
but  are  distinctly  doubtful  whether  the  case  before  us  is  one 
in  point,  then  we  naturally  express  ourselves  in  the  language 
of  hypothesis.  As  the  latter  of  these  two  elements  is  perhaps 
the  most  distinctively  characteristic,  I  will  begin  with  it,  and 
the  reasons  why  the  symbolic  system  is  entitled  to  pass  it  by. 

In  what  sense  then,  it  may  be  asked,  can  this  characteris- 

Symbolic    Logic;     that     explicitly  the  second  than  with  the  third.    I 

adopted  by  the  common  Logic;  and  mention  this  in  justification  of  what 

that  which  underlies  the  speech  of  would  otherwise  be  too  superficial  a 

common  life.     As  regards  the  first  discussion  of  so  intricate  a  matter  as 

of  these  it  is  an  imperative  duty  to  the  treatment  of  Hypotheticals  in  the 

be  precise,  but  as  regards  the  others  common  Logic, 
we  are  really  far  less  concerned  with 


332  Hypoiheticals.  [CHAP. 

tic  of  doubt  be  considered  by  us  as  extra-logical  ?  Why  are 
we  to  regard  it  as  giving  rise  to  no  more  than  an  optional 
difference  of  formal  statement  ?  Simply  because  no  attempt 
is  made  to  quantify  or  measure  our  degree  of  doubt.  Some- 
times we  are  able  to  say  how  much  doubt  we  entertain  about 
our  propositions  ;  that  is,  we  are  able  to  give  some  statistical 
details  as  to  the  proportion  of  cases  in  which  our  statement 
would  be  right.  When  this  is  so  the  proposition  is  at  once 
rightfully  claimed  by  the  Theory  of  Probability,  and  the 
reader  must  be  referred  to  that  subject  for  the  proper  methods 
of  treating  it1.  But  often  the  case  is  otherwise.  We  may 
merely  entertain  a  vague  degree  of  doubt  which  we  could 
never  venture  to  estimate,  or,  having  means  of  estimating  it 
if  we  chose,  we  may  not  at  the  moment  wish  to  do  so.  Pro- 
positions thus  entertained  are  what  the  Theory  of  Chances 
would  not  care  to  accept,  and  it  seems  to  me  that  they  form 
the  bulk  of  what  are  commonly  put  into  the  guise  of  Hypo- 
theticals.  In  this  respect  popular  language  seems  to  have 
rather  happily  seized  upon  a  characteristic  form  for  a  distinc- 
tion which,  though  not  capable  of  accurate  definition,  and 
.though  not  leading  to  any  logical  distinctions  worth  mention, 
is  of  very  considerable  practical  importance  in  the  communi- 
cation of  our  thought. 

As  regards  the  limits  of  this  characteristic  doubt,  it  should 
be  observed  that  it  refers  only  to  the  actual  occurrence,  under 
some  given  circumstances,  of  the  elements  which  compose 
this  connection  or  uniformity:  it  does  not  affect  their  mutual 
relation  of  invariable  or  general  sequence  or  coexistence. 
We  ought  to  feel  tolerably  sure  of  the  connection,  blit  feel 
some  doubt  about  its  individual  occurrence  then  and  there. 
I  know,  say,  that  a  fall  of  the  barometer  will  be  followed  by 

1  I  have  explained  my  own  view      Ouince,  Ed.  11.  1876. 
fully  on  this  point  in  the  Logic  of 


xvi.]  Hypotheticals.  333 

rain ;  this  is  the  general  regularity.  But  I  do  not  know 
whether  it  will  fall  tomorrow ;  this  lets  in  the  specific  doubt. 
If  I  did  know  that  it  would  fall  for  certain  tomorrow,  I 
should  only  require  categorical  propositions.  I  should  say, 
The  glass  will  fall  and  it  will  rain  ;  not  finding  place  for  any 
hypothesis.  Or  again,  if  I  knew  how  likely  it  was  that  the 
barometer  would  fall,  I  might  say ;  '  The  chances  are  so  and 
so  that  it  will  fall,  and  that  consequently  (so  far  as  this  is 
concerned)  it  will  rain'.  Here  again  there  seems  no  natu- 
ral opening  for  anything  in  the  way  of  a  Hypothesis.  But  it 
is  when  I  entertain  a  vague  degree  of  doubt  as  to  what  the 
barometer  will  do,  that  I  naturally  take  to  using  an  'if  to 
indicate  my  state  of  mind.  I  express  myself  by  saying  '  If 
the  glass  falls  it  will  rain'.  Here  at  any  rate,  whatever  may 
be  found  in  other  examples,  a  categorical  proposition,  suffused 
with  doubt  as  to  its  present  application,  would  seem  to  ex- 
press all  that  we  have  to  say :  '  All  falling  barometers  are 
followed  by  rain,  but  I  don't  know  that  the  barometer  will 
fall  tomorrow'. 

The  two  elements  : — connection  between  the  phenomena, 
and  a  degree  of  doubt  on  our  part : — appear  to  be  present  in 
the  case  of  every  hypothetical,  at  any  rate  when  it  is  most 
appropriately  used  ;  though  sometimes  one  or  other  of  the  two 
may  seem  to  be  missing.  The  distinction  therefore  which  is 
sometimes  drawn  between  the  'if  of  inference  and  the  'if 
of  doubt,  does  not  seem  to  me  quite  accurate.  There  ought 
always  to  be  a  uniformity,  giving  ground  to  the  inference, 
and  there  ought  always  to  be  a  doubt  whether  the  case  before 
us  is  one  in  which  that  inference  applies.  But  sometimes 
one,  and  sometimes  the  other  of  these  two  elements  may  seem 
to  drop  out  of  sight. 

Sometimes,  for  instance,  we  may  affect  a  degree  of  doubt 
which  we  do  not  really  entertain,  and  the  inferential  part  be- 


334  Hypothetical.  [CHAP. 

comes  unduly  prominent.  This  is  a  perfectly  legitimate 
rhetorical  device,  and  will  serve  to  bring  most  categorical 
propositions  into  the  hypothetical  form ;  as  when  I  say,  'If  so 
and  so  is  a  man  he  must  have  the  feelings  of  a  man '.  Often 
however  such  a  transformation  as  this  can  hardly  be  classed 
amongst  rhetorical  devices  but  represents  the  true  functions 
of  the  hypothetical.  Thus  when  we  put '  All  x  is  y'  into  the 
form  '  If  anything  is  x  then  it  must  be  y'  we  distinctly  pro- 
mulgate the  doubt  whether  everything  which  professes  to  be 
an  x  is  really  one.  That  is,  we  are  in  a  state  of  doubt  as  to 
the  application  of  some  general  rule  in  such  and  such  a  case. 
It  is  to  this  latter  class  of  cases  on  the  whole  that  the 
hypothetical  of  mathematics  and  the  more  rigid  of  the 
Physical  Sciences  should  apparently  be  referred.  They  are 
plentiful  enough  in  most  treatises  on  these  subjects,  but  where 
is  the  accompanying  doubt  to  be  detected  ?  In  one  or  two 
points.  For  one  thing  it  is  not  certain  that  the  problem  or 
the  experiment  will  be  gone  through.  '  If  two  chords  inter- 
sect within  a  circle  the  products  of  their  respective  segments 
will  be  equal'.  Perfectly  certain  as  it  is  that  the  chords  will 
intersect  one  another  thus  if  they  be  drawn,  will  they  be 
drawn  ?  it  is  optional  with  the  performer  to  do  it  or  not  as  he 
pleases.  A  general  statement  of  the  problem  may  fairly  inti- 
mate some  doubt  to  this  effect.  Moreover  it  must  be  remem- 
bered that  however  certain  any  individual  may  be  about  the 
circles  and  lines  he  means  to  draw,  he  is  standing  here  in  the 
midst  of  certainties  of  a  far  higher  order.  The  glare  of  such 
formal  assurance  may  well  make  any  moral  or  physical  con- 
fidence seem  pale  and  doubtful  in  contrast.  Moreover  there 
is  another  point  which  seems  worth  notice  in  reference  to 
geometrical  constructions.  When  I  do  draw  my  figure,  what 
sort  of  a  circle  and  chord  do  I  obtain  ?  one  so  defective  in 
comparison  with  its  ideal  that  we  may  well  throw  a  doubt 


xvi.]  Hypothetical.  335 

over  the  actual  execution  of  that  which  was  intended  to 
be  done.  The  depression  of  the  one  element  throws  into 
relief  the  height  of  the  other.  The  greater  the  stress  we  lay 
upon  the  doubt,  the  more  prominent  do  we  render  that  rigid 
connection  into  which  no  shadow  of  a  doubt  can  enter. 

So  again  the  other  constituent  element, — that  of  the  con- 
nection or  uniformity, — may  sometimes  not  be  perceptible, 
though  we  shall  always  come  upon  signs  of  it  if  we  look 
closely.  It  may  often  be  suggested  only  by  some  implication 
rather  than  be  actually  stated.  The  Spartans  answered  '  If ', 
implying  that  however  certain  the  consequences  of  the  advance 
of  the  enemy  might  be,  the  advance  itself  was  not  certain. 
Again  'What  if  we  be  detected'? — the  sort  of  reply  that 
might  often  be  given,  '  Well,  what  then'  ?  shows  that  we  are 
contemplating  not  a  doubtful  isolated  fact,  but  a  connection 
of  some  kind  whose  actual  occurrence  is  considered  doubtful. 

This  connection  or  uniformity,  as  we  need  scarcely  ob- 
serve, may  be  exhibited  in  any  order  as  to  time,  for  the  so- 
called  'consequent'  clause  in  the  hypothetical  sentence  may 
in  reality  either  succeed  the  'antecedent',  or  be  coexistent 
with  it,  or  be  succeeded  by  it.  All  that  is  requisite  is  a 
reasonable  degree  of  regularity  of  occurrence  as  between  the 
two  factors  which  constitute  the  connection.  For  example, 
starting  with  the  doubtful  fact  intimated  in  the  antecedent 
'if  I  have  a  headache  tomorrow',  I  may  attach  to  this  doubt- 
ful fact  a  certain  'consequent'  in  any  order  of  time  past, 
present,  or  future.  I  may  go  on  to  say,  'then  I  must  have 
eaten  something  unwholesome  today';  or,  'I  shall  keep  to  my 
bed  so  long  as  it  lasts' ;  or,  '  I  shall  be  more  careful  as  to  my 
diet  in  future'. 

It  may  fairly  be  enquired,  why  the  case  of  these  doubtful 
connections  should  be  thus  singled  out?  Doubtful  facts  obtain 
no  special  treatment ;  why  should  groups  of  facts  which  have 


336  Hypothetical.  [CHAP. 

a  doubt  about  them  be  distinguished,  both  grammatically, 
by  the  appropriation  of  distinct  linguistic  forms,  and  also 
logically,  by  being  commonly  discussed  in  a  section  apart? 
The  answer  must  be,  because  of  their  great  importance.  A 
doubtful  isolated  fact,  if  such  a  thing  were  found,  would  be  of 
very  little  service  to  any  one,  unless  as  a  hint  towards  further 
and  more  careful  observation.  But  generalized  connections 
of  any  kind  may  be  of  the  utmost  importance  to  us,  for  these 
constitute  the  basis,  and  indicate  the  limits,  of  all  knowledge 
and  of  all  sure  and  safe  practice.  It  seems  to  me  that  the 
Hypothetical  proposition,  as  above  interpreted,  precisely 
indicates  the  mental  attitude  of  the  most  thoughtful  and  best 
informed  persons  at  almost  every  moment  of  their  lives,  but 
especially  at  critical  conjunctures.  They  are  familiar  with 
abundance  of  suitable  uniformities,  under  the  name  of  laws ; 
as  to  which  they  feel,  or  should  feel,  no  manner  of  doubt. 
But  what  they  must  feel  doubtful  about  is  the  individual 
application,  the  occurrence  of  the  antecedent.  Doubt  here  is 
in  many  cases  just  as  desirable  and  scientific  as  is  certainty 
there.  This  double  element  seems  happily  indicated  by  the 
form  of  the  hypothetical  sentence  and  it  seems  to  me  to  be 
only  where  both  of  these  are  present  that  this  form  can  be 
used  with  rigid  propriety.  Common  language  is  therefore 
abundantly  justified  in  making  a  separate  class  of  propositions 
of  this  description,  but  it  does  not  follow  that  Logic  in 
general, — still  less  Symbolic  Logic, — should  follow  the  ex- 
ample, and  regard  them  as  falling  under  any  distinct  rules  of 
treatment.  On  the  contrary,  it  seems  to  me  that  such 
characteristics  as  these  are,  so  to  say,  strained  out  and  left 
behind  in  passing  through  the  framework  of  what  is  formal ; 
they  are  too  material  and  psychological  to  effect  an  entrance, 
It  may  be  remarked  that  the  word  'if,  though  very 
commonly  employed  to  introduce  a  hypothesis,  is  by  no 


xvi.]  Hypoiheticals.  337 

means  the  only  word  used  for  the  purpose.  There  are  various 
other  suitable  grammatical  forms,  a  reference  to  some  of 
which  may  serve  to  confirm  the  fact 'of  the  essential  identity, 
for  purely  logical  purposes,  of  such  propositions  with  those 
which  are  categorical.  'Whenever  A  is  B  then  C  is  D',  'A's 
that  happen  to  be  B  are  always  C's  that  are  D\  and  so  forth. 
Amongst  these  various  forms  a  slight  trace  of  distinction  of 
conventional  meaning  may  be  noticed.  The  two  just  men- 
tioned do  not  emphasize  our  doubt  as  to  the  occurrence  of  an 
A  nearly  so  strongly  as  the  employment  of  an  'if  commonly 
does ;  they  seem  to  occupy  here  a  sort  of  midway  position 
between  the  more  characteristic  hypothetical  and  the  cate- 
gorical. They  certainly  seem  however  to  suggest  a  doubt,  for 
it  would  be  considered  very  appropriate  to  enquire  'Yes,  but 
are  we  sure  that  A  is  B  in  this  case?'  They  seem  to  lay  the 
stress  upon  the  generality  of  the  connexion  between  the 
events,  whereas  when  we  make  use  of  an  'if  we  call  attention 
to  the  fact  that  we  feel  a  doubt  as  to  some  individual  occur- 
rence of  this  general  connexion.  We  can  therefore  suitably 
employ  an  'if  when  we  are  referring  to  an  apparently  isolated 
pair  of  events,  whereas  the  word  'whenever'  definitely  implies 
a  plurality  of  cases.  But  there  seems  to  me  nothing  in  all 
this  of  which  Logic  need  take  account. 

There  is  another  important  point  which  awaits  discussion 
before  we  quit  this  part  of  the  subject.  It  concerns  a  certain 
extension  of  the  Hypothetical  which  has  to  be  taken  into 
account  when  we  study  Symbolic  Logic,  and  arises  as  follows. 
It  is  universally  understood  in  logical  treatises  that  we  are  ah 
liberty  to  convert  negatively,  or,  as  it  is  termed,  'destructively', 
any  hypothetical  judgment  or  reasoning.  Given  'If  A  is  B 
then  C  is  D'  we  never  hesitate  to  convert  it  into  the  form  'If 
C  is  not  D  then  A  is  not  B'.  This  amounts  to  putting  the 
second  clause  of  the  Hypothetical  upon  exactly  the  same 
v.  L.  22 


338  Hypotheticals.  [CHAP. 

kind  of  footing  as  the  first,  and  calls  for  a  similar  explanation. 
We  are  still  expressing  a  uniform  connexion,  though  it  is 
now  one  of  absence  and  not  of  presence ;  and  we  are  also 
intimating,  by  our  form  of  speech,  a  measure  of  doubt  about 
the  actual  occurrence  in  question;  for  doubt  in  negation  is 
equivalent  to  doubt  in  affirmation.  Now  arises  the  question 
whether  we  are  at  liberty  to  extend  our  application  of  the 
term  'kypothetical',  and  consequently  our  rules  of  inference, 
to  the  case  in  which  the  second  element  of  the  connexion  is 
certainly  true  ?  Suppose  we  know  that  C  must  be  D,  which 
are  we  to  do : — to  insist  upon  retaining  the  right  of  conversion, 
to  forego  that  right,  or  to  reject  such  an  instance  as  not  a 
suitable  example  of  the  hypothetical? 

The  Common  Logic  is  rather  shy  of  touching  such  ques- 
tions, but  there  can  be  no  doubt  whatever  as  to  our  own 
course.  We  must  cling  to  the  formal  right  of  conversion, 
that  is,  to  contemplating  and  discussing  it,  and  trust  that  a 
way  of  reconciliation  will  be  found  open  to  us.  On  the  view 
here  adopted,  viz.  that  hypothetical  differ  in  no  symbolic 
respect  from  catogoricals,  this  is  the  only  course  which  we 
could  consistently  choose,  for  the  same  question  has  been  in 
reality  raised  and  decided  in  a  former  chapter1.  It  deserves 
however  some  further  discussion  in  the  present  context,  since 
however  identical  our  treatment  of  the  categorical  and  hypo- 
thetical may  be  at  bottom,  the  language  in  which  they  have 
to  be  explained  and  illustrated  is  different. 

As  was  remarked,  when  the  corresponding  case  was  dis- 
cussed in  a  former  chapter,  we  are  here  in  face  of  one  of  those 

1  The  corresponding  question  in  Y  is  known  to  be  'all',  that  is,  when 

the  categorical  case,  framed  in  com-  there  is  no   not-Y?    The  prevalent 

mon  logical  language,  is  of  course  doctrine  as  to  the  infinitude  of  nega- 

this :— May  we  contraposit  '  All  A'  is  tive  terms  naturally  stood  in  the  way 

1",  by  saying  'No  not-Y  is  A",  when  of  such  a  question  being  raised. 


xvi.]  Hypoiheticals.  339 

interesting  '  limiting  cases '  with  which  every  one  who  has 
studied  mathematics  is  familiar.  We  know  well  what  it 
is  there  to  take  a  formula  which  works  smoothly  enough 
within  familiar  limits,  and  to  be  called  upon  to  apply  it  to 
some  extreme  case.  If  it  be  a  sound  formula  it  must  stand 
such  a  test,  but  it  will  often  save  its  integrity  by  some  device 
which  calls  for  a  little  ingenuity  in  interpretation.  It  may 
insist  upon  demanding  that  some  element  shall  be  absent 
which  we  had  tacitly  assumed  would  be  present  as  usual,  or 
vice  versa;  or  it  may  call  for  some  extreme  and  almost 
grotesque  interpretation  of  a  term,  which  we  cannot  deny  to 
be  valid,  but  which  is  outside  the  bounds  of  all  ordinary 
usage 1. 

So  it  is  here.  We  must  be  prepared  to  admit  as  one  of 
these  limiting  cases  such  a  hypothetical  as  '  If  I  have  a  head- 
ache then  the  sea  is  salt'.  Admitting  it,  we  dare  not  object 
to  its  destructive  converse,  '  If  the  sea  is  not  salt  then  I  have 
not  a  headache';  either  of  these  apparent  inferences  holding 
good  whatever  may  be  the  case  as  regards  the  state  of  my 
head.  The  nature  of  the  limiting  case  here  is  obvious.  That 
degree  of  doubt  which  the  hypothetical  form  contemplates, 
and  which  invariable  usage  demands  shall  have  some  positive 
value,  is  here  exactly  at  the  bottom  of  the  scale,  for  it  is  =  0. 
That  is,  the  truth  of  the  consequent  in  the  constructive  form, 
and  the  falsity  of  the  antecedent  in  the  destructive,  are  enter- 

1  I  once  had  some  strawberry  summer  came  no  fruit  whatever  ap- 
plants  furnished  me  which  the  vendor  peared.  I  saw  that  it  would  be  no 
admitted  would  not  bear  many  berries.  use  to  complain,  because  the  man 
But  he  assured  me  that  this  did  not  -would  urge  that  the  size  of  the  non- 
matter,  since  they  made  up  in  their  existent  berry  was  infinite,  which  I 
size  what  they  lost  in  their  number.  could  not  see  my  way  to  disprove. 
(He  gave  me  in  fact  the  hyperbolic  I  had  forgotten  to  bar  zero  values  of 
formula,  xy  —  c2,  to  connect  the  either  variable, 
number  and  magnitude.)  When 

22—2 


340  Hypothetical.  [CHAP. 

tained  without  any  doubt  at  all ;  and  accordingly  we  know 
for  certain  in  each  case  whether  the  instance  before  us  falls 
under  the  general  rule.  But  we  may  go  further  than  this. 
The  sea  being  known  to  be  salt,  we  may  with  equal  reason 
posit  the  hypothetical  '  If  I  have  not  a  headache  the  sea  is 
salt',  with  the  corresponding  destructive.  Now  put  it  that 
the  sea  is  not  salt,  then  we  conclude  that  I  both  have  and 
have  not  a  headache.  The  paradox  here  is  not  worth  con- 
sidering except  as  an  illustration  of  what  is  meant  by  limiting 
cases  in  our  formulae,  and  of  the  lessons  they  can  teach. 
There  is  no  insurmountable  contradiction  in  the  result.  The 
two  hypotheses  postulated  that  the  sea  is  always  salt :  what 
we  infer  is  that  when  this  is  not  the  case, — in  other  words 
never, — we  are  able  to  draw  two  contradictory  conclusions1. 

Though  such  propositions  as  those  just  mentioned  cannot, 
on  technical  or  symbolic  grounds,  be  refused  a  place  amongst 
hypothetical,  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  proposal  to  admit 
them  is  really  something  of  an  abuse2.  In  any  physical  sense 
of  the  term,  a  connexion  or  uniformity  between  A  and  B 
surely  implies  that  both  A  and  B  may  sometimes  individually 
fail.  How  indeed  could  we  ascertain  that  the  uniformity 
exists,  except  by  taking  note  of  such  failures? — as  witness  the 
employment  of  the  familiar  Four  Methods  of  Herschel  and 
^Mill.  So  with  the  doubt  which  should  exist  as  to  the  appli- 
cability of  the  general  uniformity  to  the  case  before  us. 
When  the  consequent  is  rendered  certain  all  such  doubt  dis- 

1  The  reader  who  remembers  the  which  rightfully  deters  us. 

discussion  in  Chap.  vr.  may  possibly  2  They  jjave  jn  fact  no  better 

enquire  whether  we  are  here  showing  claim  to  be  considered  to  involve  a 

the   courage    of  our  convictions  in  'connexion',  than  (to  apply  an  apt 

shrinking  from  such  a  catastrophe  as  saying  by  Whately)  has  a  clock  which 

this.  The  answer  will  be  given  almost  does  not  go  to  be  called  'right'  every 

immediately,  when  it  will  appear  that  twelve  hours, 
the  contradiction  here  'is  of  a  kind 


XVI.]  Hypotheticals.  341 

appears.  But  these  considerations  support  the  whole  drift 
and  purport  of  this  chapter.  My  contention  is  that  the 
really  characteristic  elements  of  the  hypothetical  of  common 
life  and  of  Inductive  Logic  are  of  a  non-formal  nature. 
Those  characteristics  are  partly  material  and  partly  psycholo- 
gical, and  therefore  the  determination  to  force  these  proposi- 
tions through  the  forms  of  our  system  will  naturally,  so  to  say, 
crush  all  the  life  out  of  them1. 

Such  a  loss  as  this  is  inevitable.  Whenever  we  substitute 
anything  resembling  machine  work  for  hand  or  head  work, 
we  find  that  though  the  former  possesses  vast  superiority  of 
power  there  are  always  some  delicacies  of  performance  in 
which  it  exhibits  comparative  failure.  So  it  is  here.  We 
gain  a  prodigious  increase  of  power  in  the  manipulation 
of  propositions,  as  we  choose  to  treat  them,  but  it  would  be 
vain  to  pretend  that  our  treatment  elicits  all  the  delicate  im- 
plications which  common  thought  detects  in  them.  These 
remarks  are  not  directed  solely  against  the  Symbolic  System : 
as  was  shown  in  a  former  chapter,  when  discussing  the  import 
of  Propositions,  the  Common  Logic  also  has  to  disregard  many 
of  the  finer  suggestions  and  implications  which  popular 
thought  and  speech  never  fail  to  recognize.  People  who  lay 
down  a  railroad  gain  in  speed  and  certainty,  but  they  must 
consent  to  forego  the  innumerable  hints  which  are  open  to 
those  who  wander  at  will  amongst  the  customary  devious 
foot-tracks. 

1  Several  logicians, — for  instance,  true,  or  known  to  be  true  inde- 
Mr  Maccoll  and  Dr  Frege  (Begriffs-  pendently  of  A ;  which,  as  above  re- 
schrift,  p.  3) — have  recognized  the  marked,  is  quite  hostile  to  the  no- 
symbolic  necessity,  when  dealing  with  tion  of  any  true  physical  connec- 
hypotheticals,  of  divesting  the  pro-  tion  as  commonly  understood.  A 
position  'If  A  then  B'  of  any  sug-  paper  also  by  Mr  C.  S.  Peirce  (already 
gestion  of  connexion  between  A  and  referred  to ;  see  p.  146)  may  well  be 
B.  That  is,  we  must  extend  it  so  as  consulted  upon  these  limiting  cases 
to  cover  the  case  of  B  being  always  of  hypothetical  statements. 


342  Hypotlieticals.  [CHAP. 

As  regards  the  application  of  these  remarks  to  the  case  in 
point,,a  few  paragraphs  of  explanation  will  make  my  meaning 
plain.  We  know  that  '  All  x  is  y'  is  represented  by  xy  =  0. 
This  form  really  does  no  more  than  deny  that  there  can  be 
any  x  without  y ;  all  else  it  leaves  open,  and  in  so  doing  we 
frankly  admit  that  it  somewhat  departs  from  customary  im- 
plications. The  hypothetical  form,  as  we  undertake  to  repre- 
sent it,  shows  of  course  a  like  insensibility  to  convention.  As 
we  have  said,  'If  A  is  B  then  C  is  D'  is  symbolically  indicated 
by  (1  —  AB)  CD  =  0.  We  regard  it  as  a  correct  formula 
because,  when  AB  is  put  =  0  (significant  of  'A  is  B')  we  have 
at  once  C~D  =  0  (significant  of  '  C  is  D') ;  and  also  because, 
when  CD  is  not  =  0,  AB  cannot  =  0  either.  The  latter  con- 
clusion is  easily  seen  thus ; — CD  is  identical  with  AB.  CD, 
and  therefore,  when  it  does  not  vanish,  its  equivalent  AB.CD 
cannot  vanish  either  :  that  is,  a  part  of  AB  must  be  retained 
intact. 

Now  turn  to  certain  of  those  limiting  cases  previously 
suggested.  Put  CD  =  I  and  we  have  at  once  AB  =  1 :  what 
does  this  mean  ?  It  means  not  merely  that  CD  cannot  =  0,  or 
in  other  words  that  C  cannot  be  D,  but  that  this  impossibility 
is  the  only  possibility.  It  asserts  that  the  collective  denial 
of  CD,  CD,  and  CD  leads  to  the  collective  denial  of  AB,AB, 
and  AB ;  or,  raore  briefly,  that  the  assertion  that  CD  is  all 
proves  that  AB  is  all.  This  case  of 'destructive'  inference 
has  no  counterpart  in  the  common  procedure,  and  for  the 
following  reason,  as  I  apprehend.  According  to  the  popular 
interpretation  of '  If  A  is  B  then  C  is  D\  it  is  unquestionably 
assumed  that  A  and  C  are  existent  or  present1  (this  is  in  ac- 

1  Hence  I  should  say  that  if  we  is,  write  BD  =  0,   where  we  are  to 

wished  to  keep  close  to  the  popular  interpret  B  as  1B  following  on  A ',  and 

meaning  of  the  Hypothetical  here  we  D  as '  D  following  on  C'.   We  thus  get 

must  regard  A   and  C  as    certain,  the  desired  two  alternatives  requisite 

when  there  becomes  no  need  to  intro-  to  keep  us  in  harmony  with  the  popu- 

duce  them  as  symbols  at  all.    That  lar  interpretation  of  the  proposition. 


xvi.]  ffypotheticals.  343 

cordance  with  the  common  implication  as  to  the  existence  of 
the  subject  of  a  proposition).  Hence,  on  this  view,  the  two 
alternatives  '  A  is  B\  'A  is  not  B',  represent  the  only  ones 
that  are  possible;  and  similarly  with  regard  to  C  and  D. 
But,  with  us,  'A  is  B'  appears  as  AB  =  0,  and  is  consequently 
but  one  out  of  four  alternatives,  every  one  of  which  must  be 
reckoned  with.  Therefore  to  establish  the  existence  of  CD  it 
is  requisite  to  make  a  clean  sweep  of  all  the  three  remaining 
alternatives.  This  of  course  is  only  another  reminder  of  ths 
important  fact,  which  I  hope  has  been  sufficiently  admitted, 
that  our  symbolic  representation  of  propositions  is  not  the 
most  natural  representation  of  their  conventional  meaning, 
but  merely  the  best  substitute  in  accordance  with  the  condi- 
tions at  our  disposal.  In  fact  the  very  consideration  now 
before  us  had  to  be  faced  and  accounted  for  in  Chap.  vii. 
when  we  were  discussing  categorical  propositions. 

The  reader  who  has  fully  entered  into  the  spirit  of  these 
methods  will  perhaps  here  discover  a  new  difficulty  which  has 
been  stirred  up  by  our  solution  of  the  last  one.  We  say  that 
'  If  A  is  B  then  G  is  D'  is  represented  by  (1  -  AB)  CD  =  0. 
Accordingly,  if  we  had  been  asked  to  represent  'If  A  is  not  B 
then  C  is  D'  we  should  have  naturally  formulated  it  (\.—AB) 
CD  =  0.  Now  if  we  work  out  the  aggregate  denials  involved  in 
these  two  expressions,  we  find  that  between  them  they  destroy 
all  CD ;  that  is,  they  necessarily  force  us  to  the  conclusion 
CD=0,  or  '  C  is  D\  Were  it  not  therefore  for  the  explanation 
offered  in  the  last  paragraph  we  should  seem  to  be  nicely  in 
accord  with  current  assumptions,  for  the  two  hypotheses  in  their 
common  verbal  form  equally  force  us  to  the  conclusion  that 
C  must  be  D.  But  we  have  just  cut  this  support  from  under 
our  feet,  by  maintaining  that  AB  and  AB  are  but  two  out  of 
four  symbolic  alternatives,  and  cannot  therefore  by  themselves 
exhaust  the  possibilities.  Here  again,  in  order  to  see  our 


344  Hypotlieticals.  [CHAP. 

way  clearly,  we  must  look  back  a  little  and  determine  what 
our  symbols  actually  say,  and  not  merely  what  conventional 
significations  we  could  find  it  possible  to  attach  to  their 
words.  We  see  then  that  the  simple  expression  xy  =  0  (or  its 
equivalents  x  =  xy,  x  =  %y)  by  making  y  a  necessary  conse- 
quence of  x  excludes  the  possibility  of  any  not-?/  being  also 
a  consequence  : — that  is,  to  combine  '  If  x  then  y'  with  'If  # 
then  not  y'  abolishes  x  entirely.  Now  'If  A  is  B  then  C  is  D\ 
and  'If  A  is  not  B  then  C  is  D\  are  represented  respectively 
in  forms  equivalent  to  CD  =  CDAB  and  CD  =  CDAB. 
Hence  this  is  to  refer  CD  to  the  two  contradictory  determina- 
tions AB  and  AB,  and  a  reference  to  two  contradictory 
determinations  entails  as  effectual  a  destruction  as  a  reference 
to  all  four. 

A  concrete  instance  will  serve  to  show  where  we  should 
thus  have  gone  astray  in  interpreting  our  symbols.  There 
;»re  four  bells  in  the  house,  and  if  I  ring  some  one  of  them  the 
servant  will  come.  Clearly  therefore  to  ring  two  only  of  them 
is  not  sufficient  to  insure  his  appearance,  and  yet  it  appears 
as  if  this  were  what  we  had  just  assumed  must  be  the  case. 
The  reason  is  connected  with  the  old  question  as  to  the 
expression  of  alternatives.  The  ringing  of  one  bell  does  not 
interfere  with  the  ringing  of  another,  whereas  AB  is  of  course 
incompatible  with  AB,  Hence  to  make  CD  dependent  upon 
both  AM  and  AB  is  to  abolish  it  effectually,  because  these 
cannot  concur,  which  is  not  the  case  as  to  the  occurrence  of 
most  physical  alternatives1. 

1  Not,  let  it  be  understood,  that  issue   is  not  at  nil  as  to  how  alter- 

wo  imply  that  alternatives  must  be  natives  present  themselves  in  nature, 

exclusive,   but  merely  that  whether  nor  how  popular  speech  or  Common 

they  are  HO  or  not  we  throw  our  sym-  Logic  express  them,  but  merely  how 

bolio  form  into  orre  of  mutual  exclu-  they  may  best  be  expressed  symboli- 

Kion.    (It    will    be    fully  shown    in  cally.) 
Chap.    xiz.    that    the    question    at  It  may  be  added  here,  to  the    re 


xvi.]  Hypothetical.  345 

Another  view  of  the  Hypothetical  should  be  noticed  here : 
it  will  serve  both  as  a  conclusion  to  this  chapter  and  an  in- 
troduction to  the  next  but  one,  in  which  a  closely  allied  topic 
will  present  itself  from  a  somewhat  different  side.  On  this 
view  the  characteristic  of  the  Hypothetical  is  regarded  as  con- 
sisting in  the  fact  that  it  is  a  proposition  about  propositions, 
as  contrasted  with  one  about  facts. 

Mill,  for  instance,  has  laid  down  something  to  this  effect ; 
though  in  his  case,  considering  the  analysis  he  has  given  of 
the  nature  of  a  proposition,  and  the  general  scheme  of  Mate- 
rial Logic  which  he  entertains,  such  a  view  does  not  appear 
to  be  very  appropriate.  He  says,  "Though  he  [Hamilton] 
takes  much  pains  to  determine  what  is  the  real  import  of  an 
Hypothetical  Judgment,  the  thought  never  occurs  to  him 
that  it  is  a  judgment  concerning  judgments.  If  A  is  B,  C  is 
D,  means,  The  judgment  C  is  D  follows  as  a  consequence  from 
the  judgment  A  is  B"  (Examination,  p.  455). 

But  far  the  most  systematic  enunciation  of  the  doctrine 
in  question  that  I  have  seen,  is  that  by  Boole.  He  drew  a 
rather  elaborate  distinction  between  the  two  kinds  of  propo- 
sition, terming  them  respectively  primary  and  secondary  pro- 
positions, or  propositions  referring  to  facts  and  to  assertions 
about  facts.  In  the  case  of  the  latter  kind  he  adopted  what 
seems  to  me  a  somewhat  fanciful  interpretation,  viz.  that  they 
are  to  be  regarded  as  having  a  reference  to  time : — "  Let  us 
take,  as  an  instance  for  examination,  the  conditional  proposi- 
tion, 'If  the  proposition  X is  true  the  proposition  Fis  true'. 
An  undoubted  meaning  of  this  proposition  is  that  the  time  in 

marks  in  the  text  above,  that  the  contradictory  of  one  another.  Ac- 
alternatives  'If  A  is  Pthen  C  is  D',  cordingly  such  a  case  as  this  would 
and  '  If  A  is  Q  then  G  is  D',  would  be  a  fairer  symbolic  representation 
by  no  means  necessitate  the  fact  of  C  of  the  above  example  as  to  the  ring- 
being  D,  because  AP  and  AQ  are  not  ing  of  the  bells. 


346  Hypoiheticals.  [CHAP. 

which  the  proposition  X  is  true  is  time  in  which  the  proposi- 
tion Y  is  true  "  (Laws  of  Thought,  p.  163).  And  he  applied 
the  same  explanation  to  every  proposition  which  asserted 
truths  instead  of  facts.  One  must  dissent  from  such  a  man 
as  Boole  with  deference,  especially  on  a  point  which  he  him- 
self regarded  as  being  of  decided  importance  to  his  scheme, 
but  I  must  express  my  own  opinion  that  such  a  distinction  is 
not  only  untenable  in  itself,  but  also  quite  unessential  to  his 
system.  The  latter  point  will  recur  for  notice  in  another 
chapter. 

Is  there  then  any  logical  distinction  (to  slightly  vary  the 
question)  between  asserting  a  proposition,  and  asserting  that 
the  same  proposition  is  true  ?  Grammatically  considered, 
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  there  is  a  difference,  for  in  the 
verbal  statement  in  the  two  cases  the  subject  and  predicate 
are  not  the  same.  Conventionally,  also,  it  would  probably  be 
admitted  that  there  is  some  appreciable  distinction.  To  most 
minds  the  mere  utterance  of  a  proposition  does  not  carry 
quite  so  much  assurance  as  an  explicit  statement  that  that 
same  proposition  is  true ;  the  latter  form  having  more  of  an 
objective  reference  than  the  other.  There  are  so  many  pro- 
positions in  circulation  which  are  correct  as  regards  predica- 
tion, but  which  can  hardly  be  called  true, — definitions,  obsolete 
or  decaying  opinions,  and  so  forth, — that  there  is  a  tendency 
for  the  general  standard  of  mere  assertion  to  become  depre- 
ciated. Hence,  when  we  want  it  to  be  understood  that  our 
statement  is  in  actual  accordance  with  fact,  we  should  feel 
that  we  had  a  better  chance  of  insuring  this  by  saying  that 
such  and  such  a  proposition  is  true,  than  by  its  simple 
enunciation. 

It  does  not  seem  however  that  there  is  any  distinction 
here  of  which  Logic  can  take  account.  A  rude  conventional 
difference  between  statements  which  the  speaker  believes  to 


xvi.]  Hypothetical^.  347 

be  founded  in  fact,  and  those  which  he  does  not  intend  to 
mark  as  such,  may  of  course  be  tolerated ;  but  any  attempt 
to  carry  this  out  systematically  would  demand  logical  omni- 
science. And  failing  this,  can  any  difference  whatever  be 
detected  between  '  X  is  Y*,  and  '  It  is  true  that  X  is  Y'  ?  If 
we  answer  that  there  is,  we  shall  be  drawn  a  good  deal 
further  than  we  meant  to  go.  For  if  the  truth  of  a  proposi- 
tion is  thus  distinct  from  its  mere  enunciation,  ought  we  not 
also  to  distinguish  between  the  necessity  of  its  truth  and  the 
mere  probability  of  it,  and  between  various  degrees  of  the 
latter  ?  I  think  we  should  be  bound  thus  to  follow  up  the 
enquiry, — in  other  words  to  treat  of  the  Theory  of  Proba- 
bility,— and  the  very  largeness  of  the  discussion  into  which 
we  should  be  drawn  is  a  strong  reason  for  relegating  it  to  a 
separate  branch  of  Logic.  Again  if  the  assertion  of  the  truth 
of  X  is  different  from  its  bare  assertion,  and  is  yet  a  proposi- 
tion, does  not  its  truth  give  rise  to  a  new  proposition,  and  so 
on  ?  If  so,  we  are  like  a  man  trying  to  determine  the  last 
image  of  a  light  between  two  parallel  mirrors. 

It  must  be  admitted  that  the  denial  of  the  truth  of  a  given 
proposition  does  not  stand  in  quite  so  simple  a  relation  to  its 
mere  utterance  as  does  the  assertion  of  its  truth.  This  is 
owing  however  not  to  our  being  introduced  into  any  different 
order  of  facts  in  the  two  cases,  but  because  the  denial  gene- 
rally opens,  out  a  choice  of  ambiguities.  To  deny  the  truth 
of  a  proposition  is  to  assert  that  of  its  contradictory,  and  this 
in  turn  is  to  simply  assert  that  contradictory.  But  Common 
Logic  has  only  provided  a  contradictory  in  the  case  of  its  four 
selected  forms,  and  even  in  these  there  is  an  ambiguity  ex- 
cept when  we  are  dealing  with  individuals.  To  deny  the 
truth  of  the  statement  that  Milton  was  born  in  London  is 
simply  to  say  that  he  was  not  born  there,  as  to  deny  the  truth 
of  the  statement  that  he  was  not  born  there  is  simply  to 


348  Hypotheticals.  [CHAP. 

assert  that  he  was.  But  when  we  deny  the  truth  of '  All  X 
is  T'  we  do  not  quite  know  how  to  choose  between  '  Some  X 
is  not  Y',  and  '  No  X  is  Y'.  The  Common  Logic  meets  this 
by  prescribing  that  the  particular  negative  here  shall  do  duty 
for  both,  in  other  words  by  translating  'some'  as  'some  it 
may  be  all'.  Similarly  the  denial  of  the  truth  that  'No  X 
is  Y1  would  be  commonly  understood  as  the  assertion  of  the 
truth  of  the  contradictory  '  Some  X  is  Y',  which  is  merely 
equivalent  to  its  simple  assertion.  When  we  come  to  more 
complicated  propositions,  or  rather  to  any  except  the  esta- 
blished four,  we  find  no  rules  laid  down  as  to  the  formation  of 
contradictories.  There  does  not  seem  any  simple  unambigu- 
ous form  for  denying  that  'All  X  is  all  Y't  or  'All  X  is  either 
Y  or  Z\  or  any  other  more  complicated  form  that  might  be 
invented.  We  may  readily  enough  find  instances  of  a  contra- 
dictory, that  is,  we  may  find  propositions  incompatible  with 
the  one  in  question ;  but  for  a  proposition  to  be  considered 
the  contradictory  it  is  surely  essential  that  the  relation  should 
be  mutual,  so  that  the  contradictory  of  the  latter  should  lead 
us  back  necessarily  to  the  former.  This  has  only  been  pro- 
vided for  in  the  case  of  the  old-fashioned  four. 

In  these  last  remarks  we  have  purposely  discussed  the 
question  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  Common  Logic. 
As  regards  our  Symbolic  scheme  it  was  shown  in  a  former 
chapter  that  the  conception  of  what  constitutes  '  contradic- 
tion' between  propositions  had  to  be  differently  interpreted, 
and  that  it  was  indeed  quite  a  question  whether  we  could 
well  make  room  at  all  for  such  a  word.  We  saw  that  every 
proposition,  whether  originally  presented  as  an  affirma- 
tive or  a  negative,  could  be  thrown  into  an  unconditional 
negation  or  aggregate  of  negations  ;  that  this  in  fact  was  its 
import.  To  say  that  such  a  proposition  is  true,  is  here,  as 
elsewhere,  equivalent  to  its  simple  repetition ;  it  is  merely  to 


xvi.]  Hypoiheticals.  349 

say  that  these  negations  are  correct  negations.  No  change 
whatever  is  made  in  the  nature  of  the  assertion.  On  the 
other  hand  to  deny  the  truth  of  the  proposition  is  simply  to 
upset  these  negations.  But  how  many  of  them  ?  If  there 
were  but  one  (as  in  our  expression  of  an  ordinary  negative 
proposition)  the  answer  would  be  easy : — that  the  compart- 
ment which  that  proposition  had  emptied  out  was  to  be 
occupied  again ;  that  the  ejected  tenant  was  simply  to  be  re- 
instated. This,  as  we  showed,  would  lead  on  our  system  also 
to  a  particular  affirmative.  But  if  there  was  a  group  of 
negations  implied,  as  is  mostly  the  case,  there  is  no  legislation 
provided  as  to  the  use  of  the  term  'contradictory',  and  it 
seems  hardly  worth  the  trouble  of  endeavouring  to  determine 
what  arrangement  should  be  made. 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

GENERALIZATIONS  OF  THE   COMMON  LOGIC. 

THROUGHOUT  this  work  we  have  been  occupied  at  almost 
every  step  in  considering  the  extensions  which  can  be 
effected  in  the  processes  and  results  of  ordinary  Logic ;  but  it 
will  be  convenient  at  this  point,  having  now  finished  the  sys- 
tematic exposition  of  the  subject,  to  gather  together  these 
various  generalizations  so  as  to  see  what  sort  of  an  ap- 
pearance they  present  in  the  aggregate.  This  is  the  more 
necessary  since  their  importance  consists  not  merely  in  the 
fact  of  their  being  generalizations,  but  also  in  the  great 
change  of  view  which  the  admission  of  them  would  demand 
in  matters  like  the  Import  of  Propositions,  and  so  forth. 
Those  points  which  have  been  adequately  discussed  in 
the  foregoing  chapters  will  only  demand  a  very  brief  notice 
here. 

To  begin  then :  In  place  of  the  old  dichotomy  we  have 
substituted  a  system  of  polytomy;  that  is,  we  divide  the 
universe  of  things  into  all  the  ultimate  subdivisions  attain- 
able by  taking  every  term  and  its  contradictory  into  account. 
We  start  at  once  with  all  these  subdivisions  as  our  normal 


.CH.  xvil.]    Generalizations  of  the  Common  Logic.  351 

requirement,  instead  of  regarding  them  as  merely  a  possible 
attainment1. 

The  point  here  which  seems  most  characteristic  of  our 
system  is  the  following : — That  we  put  every  one  of  the 
classes  thus  obtained,  whether  positive  or  negative,  upon 
exactly  the  same  footing.  With  us,  xy  and  xy  are  classes  of 
precisely  the  same  kind.  We  do  not  indeed  strictly  speak 
of  positive  or  negative  terms  at  all,  regarding  these  words  as 
grammatical  or  conventional  expressions  founded  upon  the 
popular  necessities  of  classification.  Any  compound  term, 
such  as  xyz,  will  commonly  contain  both  positive  and  negative 
elements,  and  therefore  the  words  cease  to  apply  to  the  com- 
pound. We  have  no  reason  indeed  to  assume  that  #,  rather 
than  x,  should  represent  what  popular  language  would  regard 
as  a  positive  term ;  this  being  a  matter  for  our  own  choice. 
We  regard  #  and  x,  of  course,  as  contradictories,  but  we 
almost  decline  to  call  either  of  them  positive  or  negative2. 

1  The  writer  (before  Boole)  who  Widerspruchnichtzusammengedacht 

has  most  strongly  insisted  on  this  werden,  so  kostete  es  auch  nur  ein 

enumeration  of  all  the  possible  com-  Paar  Federstriche,  um  die  Columnen 

binations  produced  by  all  the  class  der  10  Conternationen  wo  die  Zeichen 

terms,  is   Semler  (Versuch  iiber  die  dieser  Begriffe  beisammen  stiinden, 

combinatorische  Methode,  1811).    The  wegzuschaffen  "  (p.  48). 
empirical  method  which  he  proposes,  2  This  view  of  the  primary  in- 

viz.  that  of  writing  down  all  the  com-  difference  of  application  of  x  and  x, 

binations,  and  then  scratching  out  or  as  such,  is  very  alien  to  popular  ways 

removing,  individually  or  in  groups,  of  thinking.     To  most  persons  the 

all  those  elements  which  are  contra-  interpretation  of  concrete  problems 

dieted  by  the  data,  closely  resembles  which  turn  upon  the  employment  of 

that  of  Prof.  Jevons.     "Setzen  wir  negative  classes  is  not  a  little  per- 

zum  Beispiel  man  hatte  die  56  Con-  plexing.    To  borrow  one  or  two  of 

ternationen,  die  sich  aus  den  Begrif-  those    apt   and  ingenious  examples 

fen  a,  b,  c,  d,  e,  f,  g,  h,  bilden  lassen,  with  which  all  De  Morgan's  logical 

wohlgeordnet     aufgeschrieben,    und  writings  abound,  how  many  persons 

man  bemerkte  die  Begriffe  a  und  &,  would  be  able  to  say  confidently  and 

desgleichen  b  und  d  konnten  ohne  off-hand  whether  either,  and  if  so 


352  Generalizations  of  the  Common  Logic.        [CHAP. 

When  this  view  is  taken  it  is  seen  at  once  that  we  must 
insist  upon  an  entire  reconsideration,  for  our  special  purposes, 
of  the  old  logical  account  of  contrariety  and  contradiction, 
both  as  regards  classes  and  propositions. 

First  as  regards  Classes.  The  'contradictory'  of  any 
class  is  best  interpreted  in  its  ordinary  sense,  viz.,  as  com- 
prising all  which  does  not  belong  to  that  class.  The  points 
characteristic  of  our  Logic  are  mainly  these,  that  we  apply 
the  same  notation  to  contradict  any  class  however  com- 
plicated, and  that  we  keep  prominently  in  view  all  those 
elements  of  the  full  development  into  which  the  contradiction 
of  any  such  class  can  be  broken  up.  As  regards  the  notation, 
what  we  require  is  either  some  symbol  for  the  universe  of 
discourse  from  which  the  given  class  has  to  be  excepted,  or 
some  convenient  symbol  which  can  be  applied  to  any  class 
as  a  whole.  The  notation  we  have  adopted  meets  both  these 
requirements.  Thus,  if  we  want  to  contradict  xyz  +  xyz 
all  we  have  to  do  is  to  write  it  1  —  (xyz  +  xyz) ;  or,  more 
briefly,  draw  a  single  line  over  the  whole  expression,  just  as 
we  write  x  for  1  —  x.  Other  methods  of  performing  the  same 
process  will  be  found  described  in  the  concluding  chapter, 
but  it  seems  to  me  a  serious  drawback1  in  any  symbolic  sys- 
tem if  it  does  not  meet  these  requirements. 

The  extended  signification  of  the  word  contrary  does 
not  however  seem  by  any  means  so  clear  and  simple.  In 

which,  of  these  two  statements  is  non-ancestors  of  all  the  non-descend- 

true?    (1)  The  English  who  do  not  ants  of  A  .  Bt    (Cam.  Phil.  Tr.  x. 

take    snuff    are    included    in    the  334). 

Europeans  who  do  not  take  tobacco.  l  This    is    the  case   with  Prof. 

(2)  The  English  who  do  not  take  Jevons'  system,  in  which  neither  of 

tobacco  are  included  in  the  Europeans  these  requirements  is  met.     In  his 

who  do  not  take  snuff.   (Snuff-takers  lately  published  Studies  in  Deductive 

of  course  being  included  in  tobacco-  Logic,  he  borrows  Mr  Maccoll's  nota- 

Ukers.)— Or,   again,   Who   are  the  tion  for  the  purpose. 


xvii.]          Generalizations  of  the  Common  Logic.  353 

fact  the  word  is  so  bound  up  with  the  traditional  restrictions 
of  the  ordinary  Logic  that  we  shall  have  to  make  a  con- 
siderable departure  from  customary  usage  if  we  want  to 
assign  a  signification  to  it  upon  sound  principles.  Perhaps 
the  best  account  we  could  give  (founded  as  far  as  possible  on 
the  customary  usage)  would  be  the  following: — that  as  the 
contradictory  of  a  given  class  is  the  sum  total  of  what  is 
exclusive  of  it,  so  the  contrary  of  the  given  class  is  that  class 
within  all  this  contradictory  region  which  is  farthest  removed 
from  it.  At  least  I  presume  that  this  is  most  in  accordance 
with  common  usage.  If  we  adopt  this  account  we  should 
say  that  such  a  class  as  xyz,  involving  three  terms,  has  a  con- 
tradictory of  seven  classes ;  and  out  of  these  seven  we  should 
select  as  the  'contrary'  to  it  that  one  which  contradicts  it  in 
every  detail,  in  other  words  the  class  in  which  every  con- 
stituent element  is  a  contradictory  of  the  corresponding 
element  of  the  aforesaid  class.  Thus  xyz  would  be  the 
contrary  of  xyz,  xyz  of  xyz,  and  so  on. 

A  much  better  plan  however  than  this  might  be  proposed 
if  we  had  often  occasion  to  speak  of  relations  of  this  kind. 
It  would  be  better  to  abandon  the  term  'contrary'  altogether 
and  to  use  instead  some  such  expression  as  that  of  two  class 
terms  being  contradictory  in  one,  two,  three  degrees,  &c., 
and  congruent  in  respect  of  the  remaining,  according  to 
the  number  of  constituent  elements.  We  do  not  really  find 
much  occasion  to  employ  technical  expressions  of  this  kind, 
but  if  we  did,  the  best  way  of  describing  the  relations  in  this 
respect  of  two  such  classes  as  abcde  and  abode  would  be 
by  saying  that  they  are  contradictory  in  the  third  degree  and 
congruent  in  the  second  degree.  But  in  saying  this  it  must 
be  remembered  that  the  two  classes  in  question  are  just  as 
exclusive  of  one  another  as  if  the  contradiction  were  more 
complete,  for  the  state  of  exclusion  of  one  cla^s  by  another  is 
V.L.  23 


354  Generalizations  of  the  Common  Logic.         [CHAI*. 

absolute  and  does  not  admit  of  degrees.  When  we  thus 
came  to  deal  with  classes  not  fully  subdivided,  as  for  example 
xy  and  xz,  we  should  have  to  analyse  them  fully  and 
then  describe  the  degree  of  contradiction  of  their  constituent 
elements  separately.  Thus  xy  and  xz  resolve  respectively 
into  xyz  +  xyz,  and  xyz  +  xyz.  Of  these  the  coincident, 
or  doubly  repeated  element  xyz,  furnishes  no  contradiction ; 
the  remaining  elements  xyz  and  xyz  would  have  a  two-fold 
contradiction1. 

Propositions.  As  regards  the  application  of  the  terms 
contrary  and  contradictory  to  propositions,  a  moment's  con- 
sideration will  show  us  how  far  we  have  here  wandered  from 
the  customary  view.  So  much  is  this  the  case  that  it  really 
seems  impossible  to  assign  any  rational  signification  to  the 
terms  which  shall  remain  in  harmony  with  their  customary 
meaning.  Thus  for  instance  the  two  propositions,  ary  =  0, 
#*/  =  (),  represent  respectively  'no  x  is  y\  and  'all  x  is  y'; 
and  on  the  predicative  view  of  propositions  they  certainly 
involve  between  them  a  contradiction,  indeed  a  contrariety. 
But  on  the  compartment  or  occupation  view  they  simply 
clear  out  between  them  the  whole  of  x,  one  accounting  for 
the  y-part  of  it  and  the  other  for  the  not-y  part  of  it.  On 
this  view  therefore  they  would  much  more  truly  be  described 
as  supplementary  than  as  contradictory. 

If  we  were  determined  to  find  a  use  of  the  term  which 
should  be  in  harmony  with  our  system  we  should  best  seek 
it  in  the  following  way: — We  know  that  xy  =  Q  denies 
that  there  is  such  a  class  as  xy,  that  xy  =  v  (on  the  special 

1  The  late  Prof.  Clifford  has  pro-  to  be  easily  reproduced  here.    That 

posed  a  scheme  of  nomenclature  for  discussion  was  alluded  to  in  Chap, 

propositions  as   grouped  from  this  xi.  p.  256.     It  is  published  in  his 

point  of  view,  but  it  is  too  intimately  Essays,  and  also  an  abstract  of  it 

connected  with  the  particular  discus-  in    Jevons'    Principles    of   Science 

sion  with  which  ho  is  there  occupied  (p.  143). 


xvii.]          Generalizations  of  the  Common  Logic.  355 

interpretation  of  v  adopted  in  Ch.  vn.  p.  165)  asserts  that 
there  is  such  a  class,  and  that  ccy  —  \  asserts  the  existence  of 
that  class  to  the  exclusion  of  all  else.  We  might  therefore 
lay  it  down,  with  a  reasonable  conformity  to  common  usage, 
that  any  one  of  these  forms  is  contradictory  of  the  others, 
and  that  the  two  extreme  ones,  ocy  =  Q  and  xy  =  l,  form  a  pair 
of  contraries. 

Such  an  interpretation  as  that  last  suggested  is  of  course 
rather  a  shifting  of  the  meaning  of  the  terms  in  question 
than  a  generalization  of  them.  Hardly  any  better  instance 
could  be  found  of  the  difficulty,  in  fact  impossibility,  of 
fitting  in  the  details  of  the  old  system  into  the  fabric  of  the 
new,  or  of  the  consequent  necessity  of  reconsidering  from 
the  foundation  all  the  technical  terms  which  we  have 
occasion  to  employ.  The  value  of  these  particular  technical 
terms  seems  to  me  considerable  in  the  old  Logic,  since  they 
compel  the  student  to  realize  the  precise  force  and  scope  of 
such  propositions  as  he  is  every  day  in  the  habit  of  using. 
But  on  our  system  there  is  no  opening  of  this  kind  for  them. 
There  would  have  been  no  use  in  discussing  them  here 
but  for  the  fact  that  every  effort  to  generalize  the  signi- 
fication of  well-known  terms  is  a  good  mental  exercise,  and 
still  more  the  attempt  to  realize  so  thoroughly  the  spirit  and 
methods  of  different  systems  as  to  determine  whether  the 
technical  terms  of  one  system  can  be  transferred  at  all,  even 
in  an  extended  sense,  to  another. 

So  much  for  the  Opposition  of  Propositions  :  we  will  row 
turn  to  their  Conversion.  Here  again  we  are  soon  reminded 
how  far  we  have  wandered  from  the  customary  mode  of  treating 
this  question.  The  predicative  explanation  of  propositions, 
founded  as  of  course  it  is  upon  a  real  distinction  between  the 
subject  and  the  predicate,  naturally  leads  to  a  demand 
for  rules  for  this  process  of  converting  subjects  into  predicates 

23—2 


356  Generalizations  of  the  Common  Logic.        [CHAP. 

and  vice  versa ;  whilst  on  the  compartment  view  of  proposi- 
tions we  really  have  to  stop  and  think  what  interpretation 
should  be  applied  to  the  rules  for  such  a  process.  For 
instance,  the  conversion  of  a  Universal  Negative,  xy  =  0,  can 
imply  nothing  more  with  us  than  an  optional  difference  in  the 
reading  off  of  the  proposition;  we  may  utter  it  as  we  please, 
'No  x  is  y'  or  'No  y  is  x'.  And  since  we  do  not  recognize  any 
real  distinction  between  positive  and  negative  terms  the 
same  may  be  said  of  any  other  form.  Given  xy  =  0  we 
may  utter  it  indifferently,  'All  x  is  y,'  'No  #  is  not-y',  or  'No 
not-y  is  x\  With  us  these  are  rather  conversational  than 
logical  distinctions. 

It  seems  therefore  that  in  this  direction  we  should  not 
be  led  to  any  distinction  of  value.  But  there  is  another  way 
of  regarding  the  process  which  is  by  no  means  synonymous 
with  reading  off  one  and  the  same  statement  with  the  other 
end  foremost,  as  in  common  Conversion.  From  the  statement 
'all  x  is  y'  we  have  obtained  'some  y  is  x\  When  we  look  at 
this  in  the  light  of  our  symbolic  system  we  see  that  it  may 
be  regarded  as  a  very  special  case  of  this  general  problem1: 
— Given  #  as  a  function  of  y,  find  y  as  a  function  of  x. 

If  we  take  this  view  of  the  process  to  be  performed: — it 
would  be  almost  absurd  to  continue  to.  use  the  old  term 
'conversion'  in  reference  to  it: — we  should  describe  it  as 
follows.  Let  a;  be  a  logical  expression,  involving  y  amongst 
other  terms,  so  that  we  may  exhibit  it  in  the  form  x=f(y). 
It  is  desired  to  'convert'  this  relation  into  one  which  shall 
exhibit  y  in  terms  of  x.  We  indicate  the  desired  expression, 

1  It  should  be  noticed  that  we  of  restrictions,  will  necessarily  lead 

must  not  speak  of  tlie  generalization  to  a  variety  of  generalizations,  ac- 

of  a  process,  as  if  there  could  be  but  cording  to  the  number  of  such  restric- 

one.    A  process  carried  out  (as  must  tions  removed,    and  the   extent  to 

always  be  the  case)  under  a  variety  which  we  remove  them. 


xvii.]          Generalizations  of  the  Common  Logic.  357 

in  accordance  with  familiar  mathematical  usage,  in  the  form 
y=f~l(x).  The  reader  must  not  for  a  moment  suppose  that 
this  solves  the  problem;  or  even  implies  that  it  admits  of 
solution,  whether  determinately  or  indeterminately.  It  is 
rather  a  definition  of  what  we  want,/"1  (a;)  being  definable  as 
anything  which  when  acted  upon  by  the  process  /will  yield 
x\  in  other  words,  f{f~l(x]}=x.  This,  of  course,  is  only 
a  generalization  of  a  procedure  with  which  the  reader  became 

fYt 

familiar  in  the  third  chapter.     Just  as  -  indicated  any  class 

which  when  logically  restricted  by  y  will  yield  x,  fo  does 
f~l(x)  indicate  any  class  which  when  operated  on  by  the 
general  logical  procedure  represented  by/,  will  yield  x. 

As  it  happens,  the  desired  result  can  not  merely  be 
symbolically  indicated,  but  admits  of  actual  performance; 
though  here,  as  in  most  other  cases  of  inverse  procedure,  the 
result  is  usually  indefinite  within  certain  limits.  For,  be- 
ginning with  f(y],  this  must  be  either  a  directly  or  an 
inversely  assignable  logical  class,  these  being  the  only  logical 
functions  which  we  recognize  as  data  or  can  deduce  as 
results.  In  other  words  f(y]  must  be  one  of  our  integral  or 
fractional  forms,  and,  if  a  fractional  one,  is  reducible  by 
development  to  an  integral  form.  Hence  x,  or  f(y\  can 
be  exhibited  as  the  sum  of  a  number  of  logical  class  elements, 
these  being  of  course  in  the  first  degree.  Accordingly,  con- 
versely, y  can  be  exhibited  (by  logical  processes  correspond- 
ing to  the  solution  of  a  simple  equation  of  the  first  degree) 
as  either  an  integral  or  a  fractional  function  of  x,  and 
consequently,  by  development,  as  an  integral  function.  That 
is,  given  x  =  f(y),  y=f~1(x)  can  always  be  solved  and  the 
result  exhibited  in  a  strictly  intelligible  logical  shape.  And 
we  may  call  this  a  generalization  of  the  ordinary  process  of 
Conversion. 


358  Generalizations  of  the  Common  Logic.        [CHAP. 

I  need  not  remind  the  reader  that  this  is  a  process  which 
we  have  perpetually  had  to  perform  in  the  course  of  this 
work.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  we  had  the  relation 
x  =  1  —  yz,  and  were  told  to  determine  y  in  terms  of  x.  We 

have  -, 

1  ~x     =    •  ft   - 

y=—    —  =  xz  +  $xz, 

% 

which  is  the  requisite  result,  viz.  y  in  terms  of  x. 

Most  of  the  remaining  generalizations  which  the  Sym- 
bolic Logic  introduces  have  been  already  fully  expounded  in 
the  preceding  chapters,  but  for  the  sake  of  aiding  the  total 
impression  the  more  important  of  them  may  be  briefly  repre- 
sented here. 

The  Schedule  of  Propositional  Forms.  The  change  here 
is  more  in  respect  of  the  import  and  significance  than  in  that 
of  mere  generalization,  great  as  the  latter  is.  Thus  we 
entirely  discard  the  common  distinction  between  affirmative 
and  negative,  whilst  we  attach  quite  a  new  kind  of  importance 
to  that  between  universal  and  particular.  Thus  for  the  old 
four  prepositional  forms  we  substituted,  as  a  beginning,  the 

following  twelve1:  rt       ., 

xy  =  0,  v,  1, 

xy  =  Q,  v,  1, 
xy  =  0,  v,  1, 
xy  =  0,  v,  1. 

1  Lambert  proposed  a  three-fold  not  seen  this  work.  I  may  here  repeat 

quantitative  arrangement  of  proposi-  a  remark  already  made,  viz.,  that 

lions:    "Auf  diese   Art  dehnt   sich  though  this  tabular  arrangement  of 

die  logische  Arithmetic  nur  auf  das  propositions  answers  well  for  most 

alle,  etliche,  kein  aus.    Alle  isi  =  l,  empirical  purposes,  it  does  not  seem 

kein  is  =  0,  etliche  1st  ein  Bruch  der  to  fit  in  with  those  higher  generali- 

zwischen  1  und  0  fallt,  den  man  aber  zations  in  which  we  deal  with  the 

uubestimmt  lasst"  (Architectonic,  i.  logical  expression  f(x)  as  such.     In 

202). — This  note  should  have  been  these  cases  1  and  0  seem  the  only 

inserted  in  Ch.  vn. ,  but  at  the  time  working  values  of  x. 
when  that  chapter  was  written  I  had 


xvii.]          Generalizations  of  the  Common  Logic.  359 

To  these  we  might  continue  to  add  other  forms,  by  com- 
bining two  or  more  of  the  four  kinds  of  class  compartments. 
How  rapidly  the  number  of  possible  forms  mounts  up  when 
we  thus  group  the  possibilities  furnished  by  the  introduction 
of  more  than  two  class  terms  was  indicated  in  Chapter  XI. 
It  was  seen  there  that  the  mere  declarations  that  such  and 
such  compartments  were  empty  furnished  no  less  than 
4,294,967,295  cases,  when  there  were  four  class  terms  con- 
cerned in  their  production.  If  we  wished  to  retain  some 
plan  of  grouping  and  arranging,  which  should  be  in  accor- 
dance as  far  as  possible  with  the  old  lines  of  arrangement, 
probably  the  best  mode  of  doing  so  would  be  to  proceed  in 
the  way  proposed  by  Prof.  Jevons  and  already  referred  to  in 
the  chapter  in  question. 

In  reference  to  the  above  scheme  of  propositions  some 
remarks  may  here  be  inserted  to  account  for  the  extremely 
little  use,  in  fact  the  almost  entire  absence  of  use,  that 
has  been  made  throughout  this  work  of  any  propositions 
which  can  strictly  be  called  'particular'.  In  thus  insisting 
upon  strictness  of  designation  I  mean  of  course  to  exclude 
those  pseudo-particulars  which  are  represented  in  the  form 
AB  =AC.  No  doubt  a  proposition  which  tells  us  that  'the  It 
which  are  A  are  the  same  as  the  C  which  are  A ',  may  be  re- 
garded as  telling  us  that 'some  B  are  C",  but  as  it  determines 
the  'some'  by  an  ordinary  class  term  its  pretensions  to 
particularity  are  spurious  and  misleading.  The  true  par- 
ticular is  that  which  otfers  us,  within  the  terms  in  question, 
no  clue  whatever  by  which  we  can  determine  what  the 
'some'  may  be. 

As  regards  then  these  true  particulars,  I  think  that 
the  scheme  given  above  is  a  sound  and  appropriate  one  for 
all  empirical  purposes.  By  this  I  mean  that  it  will  not  only 
serve  to  tabulate  and  distinguish  all  ordinary  propositions, 


360  Generalizations  of  the  Common  Logic.        [CHAP. 

with  due  insistance  on  their  essential  characteristics  ;  but 
will  also  enable  us  to  do  everything  with  them  in  the  way  of 
inference,  short  of  attaining  to  those  widest  generalizations 
by  which  we  develop  f(x,  y),  say,  and  eliminate  x  or  y  from 
it.  For  instance  in  the  immediate  inference,  'Some  x  is 
not  y',  as  following  from  'No  x  is  y';  we  must  understand  the 
latter  to  imply  that  there  is  certainly  some  x,  but  inasmuch 
as  in  the  same  breath  we  say  that  there  is  not  xy,  it  is 
implied  that  there  is  xy.  Hence  'No  x  is  y\  when  we  elicit 
its  popular  implications,  amounts  to  the  two,  xy  =  0,  xy  =  v. 
Of  these  the  latter,  when  taken  separately,  yields  the  desired 
immediate  inference  'Some  x  is  not  y'.  Or  again,  look  at  the 
syllogism  Bokardo.  I  place  it,  and  its  symbolic  expression* 
side  by  side; — 

Some  Y  is  not  Z       yz  =  v, 

AllFisZ  yic  =  0, 

Some  X  is  not  Z        xz  =  v. 

Expand  yz  =  v  into  xyz  +  xyz  =  v,  we  are  therefore  assured 
that  both  these  terms  cannot  vanish.  But  the  term  xyz  does 
vanish  (by  the  minor  premise) ;  accordingly  xyz  must  survive, 
which  justifies  the  conclusion. 

On  this  plan,  by  regarding  any  equation  of  the  type 
X^v  as  a  simple  assurance  that  one  or  more  of  the  con- 
stituent terms  in  X  must  be  saved,  we  can  I  think  work  out 
most  logical  examples  in  an  empirical  way.  Under  the  name 
of  empirical  I  include  not  only  the  ground  covered  by  the 
syllogism,  but  also  all  such  methods  as  those  which  form  the 
bulk  of  several  recent  treatises  on  Symbolic  Logic.  So  long 
as  we  only  subdivide  or  develop  our  logical  classes  by  treating 
each  term  separately,  instead  of  resorting  to  such  formulae  as 
f(x)  =f(l)x+f(0)x;  so  long  as  we  work  out  inverse  problems 
indirectly  merely,  by  seeing  which  of  all  the  various  possibili- 
ties can  subsist  as  actualities,  instead  of  proceeding  directly 


xvii.]          Generalizations  of  the  Common  Logic.  361 

from  x  =f(y)  to  y  =f~l(x) ',  so  long  as  we  eliminate  tentative- 
ly by  substitutions  instead  of  resorting  to  such  a  formula 
as /(1)/(0)  =  0;  so  long  a  scheme  of  propositions  such  as 
that  above  will  succeed  well  enough. 

For  the  purposes  of  the  higher  generalizations  it  does 
not  seem  to  me  as  if  any  theory  were  yet  proposed,  which 
would  answer  except  for  a  dichotomous  scheme,  represented 
symbolically  by  1  and  0,  and  logically  by  the  contradictories 
'is'  and  'is  not'.  Into  such  a  dichotomous  scheme  truly 
particular  propositions  will  not  apparently  fit,  and  they  have 
accordingly  to  be  rejected  from  all  the  higher  generalizations. 
If  such  propositions  were  of  real  scientific  importance,  or 
forced  themselves  into  many  of  our  familiar  problems,  this 
inability  to  grapple  effectually  with  them  would  certainly  be 
a  blemish  in  the  Symbolic  Logic.  As  it  is,  we  can  afford  to 
part  with  them  without  much  sense  of  loss. 

Elimination.  What  we  undertake  under  this  name  is  a 
real  generalization  of  familiar  processes.  The  scope  however 
of  these  processes,  in  the  traditional  treatment,  is  so  slight 
that  probably  many  logicians  would  have  to  pause  and  think, 
if  asked  whether,  and  under  what  conditions,  rules  could  be 
laid  down  for  the  process  of  elimination  of  terms  from  a 
group  of  propositions.  They  do,  of  course,  recognize  such 
rules,  but  only  to  the  trifling  extent  of  eliminating  one  term 
out  of  three;  the  three  being  given  two  and  two,  in  a  pair  of 
propositions  of  a  specified  kind,  and  the  term  to  be  eliminated 
being  the  one  which  occurs  in  both  premises.  What  the 
Symbolic  Logic  proposes  is  the  problem : — Given  any  number 
of  terms,  contained  in  any  number  of  propositions,  assign 
a  formula  for  the  result  of  eliminating  any  number  of  those 
terms. 

Reasonings.  Here  again  we  have  a  true  process  of  gene- 
ralization. A  mode  of  stating  the  ordinary  process  would  be 


362         Generalizations  of  the  Common  Logic.   [CHAP.  xvn. 

the  following :  Given  two  propositions  involving  three  terms, 
two  and  two,  so  that  one  term  occurs  in  both;  these  proposi- 
tions, remember,  being  selected  from  an  assigned  schedule 
containing  four  admissible  types;  find  in  what  cases  a  third 
proposition  distinct  from  those  two,  but  drawn  from  the  same 
schedule,  can  be  inferred  from  them.  The  problem  of  the 
Symbolic  Logic  is:  Given  any  number  of  non-quantitative 
propositions,  of  any  type  whatever,  and  involving  any  number 
of  terms,  assign  a  general  formula  indicating  what  class 
combinations  can  be  established  (conditionally)  from  them, 
what  combinations  can  be  negatived  absolutely,  and  what 
combinations  can  receive  no  such  solution  either  way.  It 
will  be  seen  therefore  that  whereas  the  problems  of  elimina- 
tion and  inference  are  almost  exactly  the  same  thing  when 
regarded  from  the  common  or  restricted  point  of  view,  they 
develop  in  very  different  directions  when  generalized. 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

CLASS  SYMBOLS  AS  DENOTING  PROPOSITIONS. 

IN  a  preceding  chapter  we  had  to  say  something  about  the 
existence  of  a  certain  '  universe  of  discourse ',  within  which 
o.ur  symbols  must  always  be  considered  to  have  their  applica- 
tion, for  the  time  being,  confined.  As  to  the  nature  of  this 
universe  we  said  nothing  ;  or  rather  we  gave  it  to  be  under- 
stood that  this  depended  entirely  upon  the  data,  and  the 
intention  of  those  who  employ  the  data.  It  was  merely 
insisted  on  that  the  various  ultimate  compartments  or  sub- 
divisions were  to  be  considered  as  being,  within  the  limits 
assigned  to  the  universe,  mutually  exclusive  and  collectively 
exhaustive.  Our  only  assumption  as  to  the  mutual  relations 
of  x  and  x  was,  that,  whatever  x  stood  for, — and  it  might 
stand  for  almost  anything  we  pleased, — x  should  stand  for 
the  rest  which  constituted  the  '  all'  of  which  we  took  account. 
Current  logical  prepossessions,  fortified  by  the  suggestions 
furnished  in  many  of  the  examples  which  we  have  had 
occasion  to  employ,  will  have  disposed  most  readers  to  put  a 
specif  interpretation  upon  the  nature  of  this  logical  universe, 
the  insufficiency  of  which  must  now  be  pointed  out.  For  one 


364  Class  symbols  as  denoting  propositions.        [CHAP. 

thing  it  will  probably  be  assumed  that  x  and  x,  &c.  stand  for 
classes  of  things  as  opposed  to  individuals ;  that  is,  that  they 
are  in  their  actual  usage,  what  we  have  indeed  commonly 
called  ,9  them,  class  terms.  And  again,  it  will,  I  think,  be 
tacitly  assumed  that  the  whole  group  of  things  referred  to  in 
the  universe  will  generally  be  possessors  in  common  of  some 
substratum  of  attributes,  however  they  may  be  differentiated 
from  one. another  by  the  presence  and  absence  of  other  attri- 
butes. 

The  removal  of  the  first  of  these  restrictions  will  not  give 
much  trouble,  since  very  familiar  admissions  on  the  part  of 
the  Common  Logic  have  already  prepared  the  way.  It  is 
fully  recognized  everywhere  that  the  '  class'  represented  by  a 
term  in  our  propositions  may  be  an  individual :  what  is  not 
so  commonly  recognized  is  the  fact  that  the  contradictory  of 
that  class  may  also  be  nothing  more  than  another  individual ; 
that  is,  that  we  may  reject  the  old  doctrine  as  to  the  infini- 
tude of  a  negative  term,  which  still  survives  in  so  many 
quarters.  Of  course,  if  our  universe  were  very  wide,  the 
selection  out  of  it  of  one  individual  would  leave  a  miscellane- 
ous host  behind,  but  there  is  no  necessity  that  the  universe 
should  be  thus  wide.  Look,  for  instance,  at  the  expression 
ory+xy.  There  is  nothing  to  hinder  us  from  restricting  our 
universe  here  to  Mr  Gladstone  and  Lord  Beaconsfield,  and  to 
the  fact  of  their  being  in  or  out  of  office.  Whichever  then  of 
the  two  statesmen  we  mark  by  x,  the  other  will  be  marked 
by  x;  and  if  we  indicate  the  fact  of  being  in  office  by  y,  then 
that  of  being  out  of  office  will  be  indicated  by  y.  Hence  the 
formula  1  =  ocy  +  xy  simply  asserts  the  fact  that  one  of 
them  must  be  in  office  and  the  other  out  of  it.  When  this 
statement  is  combined  with  our  standard  formal  condition, 
1  =  xy  +  xy  +xy  +  xy,  we  have  xy  =  Q,  xy  =  0,  indicating 
that  both  cannot  be  in  office  together,  nor  both  out  of  office 


XVI II.]         Class  symbols  as  denoting  propositions.  365 

together.  All  this  is  simply  a  matter  of  application  or  inter- 
pretation of  our  rules,  it  in  no  way  touches  their  formal 
validity. 

The  other  restriction  which  has  to  be  laid  aside  may 
perhaps  demand  a  little  more  explanation.  When  dealing 
with  classes  of  things,  especially  in  common  conversation,  it 
is  so  usual  to  group  things  together  only  when  they  are  some- 
what homogeneous,  that  we  come  to  assume  almost  as  a 
matter  of  course  that  the  objects  composing  these  classes 
have,  so  to  say,  a  deep  bottom  in  common,  with  only  a  super- 
ficial diversity.  For  instance,  the  kind  of  concrete  example 
which  people  would  naturally  fit  in  to  the  formal  framework 
xy  +  xy  would  be,  say,  'French  who  are  not  Catholics  and 
Catholics  who  are  not  French'.  If  so,  it  is  clear  that  the 
great  bulk  of  the  attributes  involved  are  common  to  these 
two  mutually  exclusive  classes,  those  which  differentiate 
them  being  by  comparison  few.  And  this  will  mostly  be  the 
case,  except  when  we  designedly  stretch  our  universe  be}Tond 
the  habitual  reference  of  common  thought,  and  make  it 
approximate  towards  the  logician's  limits  of  what  is  con- 
ceivable. 

The  grounds  of  the  belief  that  these  represent  the  most 
appropriate  kind  of  logical  example  lie  far  down  in  the  neces- 
sities of  language,  and  the  physical  and  mental  causes  which 
have  produced  them.  They  seem  to  me  connected  with  the 
general  practice  of  making  the  subject  and  the  predicate  in 
most  cases  nearly  correspond  respectively  to  substance  and 
attribute.  In  affirmation  at  any  rate,  if  not  in  negation,  we 
commonly  regard  the  subject  as  a  thing  endowed  with  miscel- 
laneous and  indefinitely  numerous  attributes,  the  function  of 
the  predicate  being  to  modify  the  subject  by  adding  on  one 
or  more  fresh  attributes.  The  leading  conceptiQn  is  through- 
out that  of  a  substratum  of  permanent  qualities  with  a 


366  Class  symbols  as  denoting  propositions.       [CHAP. 

relatively  small  number  of  differentiating  ones.  The  ordinary 
logician  has  done  something  to  liberalize  our  usage  in  this 
respect,  but  not  with  very  great  success,  the  grammarian 
being  rather  too  powerful  for  him.  We  encounter  the  diffi- 
culty, for  instance,  in  conversion1,  for  when  we  want  to  make 
the  subject  and  predicate  change  places  the  proprieties  of 
language  greatly  thwart  our  logical  rules.  '  Some  men  are 
passionate',  has  to  be  changed  into  'Some  passionate  (persons, 
things,  or  what  not)  are  men'.  We  feel  it  necessary,  so  to  say, 
to  weight  the  subject,  since  it  sounds  awkward  to  have  a  alight 
subject  with  a  heavy  predicate  attached  to  it2.  Propriety  of 
language  suggests  that  the  subject  should  contain  the  bulk  of 
the  attributes ;  should,  in  fact,  be  by  comparison  a  substance 
of  some  kind  modified  by  attributes. 

Recur  for  a  minute  to  the  example  about  the  French 
Catholics.  This  might  be  written  in  the  form:  'Men  (whether 
French  and  not-Catholic,  or  Catholic  and  not-French)':  in 
which  the  bulk  of  the  attributes,  namely  those  conveyed  by 
'  men',  are  commou  to  both  the  distinct  classes.  So  cus- 
tomary is  it  thus  to  group  homogeneous  things,  that  the 
forms  of  language  tend  to  keep  up  the  illusion  of  it  even 
when  there  is  no  reality  underlying  them.  They  succeed 
in  doing  this  in  one  or  two  different  ways.  Let,  for  instance, 
our  terms  and  their  contradictories  stand  for  the  presence  and 
the  absence  of  two  men  A  and  B\  what  constant  common 
clement  is  there  throughout  the  expression  xy  +  %?  Its  two 
elements  stand  respectively  for  'the  presence  of  A  and 
the  absence  of  B',  and  '  the  absence  of  A  and  the  presence  of 
B';  and  these  have  really  nothing  in  common.  But  when  we 

1  Mr  Macfarlane  has  called  at-  enquired  why  we  should  not  speak  of 

tention  to  this  in  his  Algebra  of  "the  horseness  of  the  speed"  as 

Logic,  p.  14.  well  as  of  "the  speed  of  the  horse." 

'  Do    Morgan  haa    humorously  (Camb.  Phil.  Trans,  x.  340.) 


XVIII.]        Class  symbols  as  denoting  propositions.  307 

group  these  together  we  should  very  commonly  talk  of  '  the 
case  of  A  being  present  and  B  absent,  just  as  we  talked 
about  'the  men'  whether  Catholics  or  not.  But  the  one 
phrase  does,  and  the  other  does  not,  imply  a  real  substratum 
of  attributes,  that  is,  of  relevant  attributes,  in  common. 

In  other  instances  this  device  of  language  is  less  thinly 
veiled.  Thus  if  xy  +  xy  stand  for  '  wind  without  rain'  and 
'rain  without  wind',  we  should  very  probably  apply  the  com- 
mon word  'weather'  to  both  cases,  by  speaking  of  the  weather 
being  windy  and  not  rainy  or  rainy  and  not  windy.  But  the 
wind  and  the  rain  together  are  the  weather,  or  at  most  some 
additional  phenomena  of  the  same  kind  must  be  called  for  in 
order  to  constitute  all  that  is  signified  by  the  word.  The 
constituent  elements  therefore  in  the  logical  expression  have 
really  little  or  nothing  in  common,  and  the  common  word 
prefixed  to  them  all  alike  is  scarcely  more  than  a  device  of 
language. 

Whether  or  not  this  interpretation  of  the  above  examples 
be  accepted,  they  will  equally  serve  to  call  attention  to  an 
extremely  important  generalization  upon  which  we  now  have 
to  insist.  It  is  indeed  difficult  to  exaggerate  the  importance 
of  the  step  before  us,  since  its  due  realization  is,  to  my  think- 
ing, quite  the  most  valuable  speculative  advantage  to  be 
gained  by  the  study  of  a  generalized  Logic.  It  has  come 
under  our  notice  incidentally  more  than  once  already,  but 
must  now  be  deliberately  insisted  on. 

Our  present  position  then  is  this.  Starting  with  the 
familiar  conception  of  classes  composed  of  an  indefinite  num- 
ber of  individuals,  we  found  that  we  could  conveniently 
express  the  desired  logical  relations  of  these  classes  by  aid  of 
a  set  of  symbols,  borrowed,  as  it  happens,  from  mathematics. 
But  those  who  call  in  the  aid  of  symbols  generally  find  that 
they  have  got  possession  of  a  machine  which  is  capable  of 


3G8  Class  symbols  as  denoting  propositions.  '    [CHAP. 

doing  a  great  deal  more  work,  and  even  very  different  kinds 
of  work,  besides  what  they  originally  expected  from  it.  To 
the  mathematician,  of  course,  this  is  perfectly  familiar.  In- 
deed the  history  of  the  formal  part  of  his  science  is  in  great 
part  an  account  of  the  successive  extensions  opened  out  by 
new  interpretations  and  applications  of  the  same  set  of  formal 
rules1.  Sometimes  the  machine  needs  a  slight  structural 
alteration  to  enable  it  to  perform  its  new  work : — thus, 
in  mathematics,  in  order  to  make  our  algebraic  symbols 
do  Quaternion  work  we  have  to  suspend  the  commutative 
law.  But,  as  a  rule,  we  retain  the  old  laws  unchanged, 
merely  looking  out  for  new  work  which  they  are  fitted  to 
perform. 

This  then  is  the  step  now  before  us  in  Logic.  Look  again 
at  our  fundamental  formula,  1  =  xy  +  xy  +  xy  +  xy.  It  may 
be  quite  true  that  when  we  first  appealed  to  it  we  only  had 
in  view  such  classes  of  things  as  those  denoted  by  general 
names.  But  a  little  reflection  soon  convinces  us  that  the 
symbols  have  wider  capabilities.  All  that  they  imperatively 
demand  is  that  the  various  elements  xy,  xy,  and  so  forth, 
shall  be  mutually  exclusive  and  collectively  exhaustive,  and 
that  they  shall  obey  those  few  simple  laws  of  operation 
described  in  the  second  chapter.  Our  formal  framework  may 
have  been  originally  devised  to  cover  a  system  of  classes  each 
composed  of  a  plurality  of  individuals,  but  now  that  we  have 
acquired  it  we  find  that  it  is  best  regarded  as  simply  a  scheme 
of  contradictories  of  a  certain  kind,  subject  to  certain  laws, 
and  that  it  will  therefore  cover  any  set  of  contradictories 
which  fulfil  the  same  requirements. 

As  we  do  not  at  present  propose  to  admit  anything  that 
can  be  called  a  structural  change  in  our  symbolic  machine,  by 

1    In    accordance  with  what   is      the     Permanence     of     Equivalent 
sometimes    called   the  Principle   of      Forms. 


xviii.]        Class  symbols  as  denoting  propositions.  369 

modifying  the  laws  of  operation1,  all  that  we  have  to  do  is  to 
see  how  many  of  the  tacit  or  customary  restrictions  upon  the 
nature  of  a  'class'  can  be  laid  aside  without  affecting  the 
validity  of  our  symbolic  operations.  Now  a  moment's  consi- 
deration will  show  that  such  restrictions  as  those  noticed 
towards  the  commencement  of  this  chapter  are  of  no  signifi- 
cance whatever.  Whether  xy  and  xy  have  any  attributes  in 
common ;  whether  they  stand  for  indefinitely  numerous 
groups,  for  definite  groups,  or  for  individuals ;  is  indifferent. 
Accordingly  we  may  generalize  without  hesitation  up  to  this 
extent. 

But  a  good  deal  more  than  this  can  be  done  by  our  dis- 
carding any  obligation  on  the  part  of  the  symbols  to  represent 
material  objects  at  all.  Let  #,  for  instance,  denote  the  truth 
of  a  given  proposition  and  x  its  falsity.  This  assumption  (as 
Avill  presently  be  shown  in  more  detail)  will  fit  in  excellently 
with  all  our  requirements.  We  should  then  have  to  interpret 
the  expression  scy  4-  Hey  as  representing  the  alternative  of  the 
truth  of  one,  and  one  only,  of  the  two  propositions  referred  to 
by  x  and  y.  Again,  we  might  understand  by  x  something 
abstract,  but  still  more  complex,  by  regarding  it  as  represent- 
ing the  validity  of  some  whole  train  of  argument.  In  this 
case  x  stands  for  the  invalidity  of  the  same  argument,  that  is, 
for  its  failure  to  establish  its  conclusion,  whether  that  conclu- 
sion in  itself  be  true  or  false.  Combine  these  symbols  with 
others  of  a  like  significance,  and  we  have  at  once  expressions 
for  the  combination  of  arguments  sound  and  unsound.  Thus 
xyz  might  stand  for  the  validity  of  the  two  arguments  indi- 
cated by  x  and  z,  and  the  invalidity  of  that  indicated  by  y. 

Again,  we  may  set  the  symbols  to  stand  for  the  trust- 
worthiness of  assigned  witnesses.  Thus  if  x  stand  for  some 
man's  trustworthiness,  x  will  stand  for  the  contradiction  of 

1  This  question  will  have  to  be  Discussed  in  the  next  chapter. 
V.L.  24 


370  Class  symbols  as  denoting  propositions.        [CHAP. 

this,  viz.  for  his  untrustworthiness,  and  therefore  indicates 
that  we  have  so  far  no  grounds  of  opinion  either  for  or  against 
the  fact  testified.  A  distinct  case  from  this  last  is  produced 
l>y  letting  x  stand  for  the  truthfulness  of  the  witness,  that  is, 
for  the  fact  that  his  statement  is  actually  true.  This  leads  to 
some  difference  of  interpretation  throughout  our  use  of  the 
pair  of  contradictories  x  and  x.  The  antithesis  now  is  not 
merely  between  the  fact  of  a  thing  being  established  and  not 
being  established,  but  between  its  having  actually  happened 
and  not  having  happened.  Hence  combinations  admissible 
under  the  former  interpretation  may  become  inadmissible 
under  the  latter.  To  say  that  the  witness  is  untrue  implies 
that  his  statement  is  false  ;  to  say  that  he  is  untrustworthy 
leaves  a  way  open  to  either  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  his 
statement.  Problems  belonging  to  these  latter  classes  play  a 
large  part,  under  numerical  treatment,  in  the  Theory  of 
Probability1,  but  do  not  deserve  any  special  notice  in  a 
purely  logical  treatise. 

It  must  not  be  assumed  that  the  interpretations  above 
indicated  represent  the  only  ones  available  for  us,  or  even  the 
only  suitable  kinds.  It  would  be  the  height  of  temerity 
to  maintain  that  a  symbolic  apparatus  will  only  do  those 
kinds  of  work  for  which  we  may  have  happened  at  present  to 
find  it  capable.  But  the  reader  will  readily  trace  the  same 
formal  antithesis  between  '  is'  and  '  is  not',  and  the  perma- 
nency of  the  same  laws  of  operation,  throughout  the  whole 
field  of  available  application,  whatever  its  extent  may  be. 
It  must  be  clearly  understood  that  none  of  these  various 
interpretations  can  be  regarded  as  giving  rise  to  anything 
deserving  the  name  of  a  distinct  scheme  or  system.  Symbo- 
lically, the  scheme  is  absolutely  one  and  the  same  through- 

1  A  very  good  account    of   the      distinction  in  question  is  to  be  found 
meaning  and  consequences   of  the      in  De  Morgan's  FormaJ  io<7/c  (p.  191). 


XVIII.]        Class  symbols  as  denoting  propositions.  371 

out.  Indeed,  if  we  abstract  sufficiently,  we  can  also  say  that 
there  is  only  one  and  the  same  interpretation  throughout,  for 
in  every  case  we  deal  with  the  various  combinations  in  which 
'presences'  and  'absences'  may  be  arranged.  To  the  one 
formal  framework  built  up  out  of  x  and  x  and  the  like,  cor- 
responds the  verbal  framework  which  may  be  built  up  out  of 
Yes  and  No  variously  combined  and  applied.  Symbolically 
and  verbally,  alike,  there  is  in  each  case  a  primary  and 
necessary  scheme  of  possibilities,  which  is  limited  by  the 
accidental  and  material  conditions  afforded  by  the  data. 

Amongst  all  the  various  interpretations  which  are  thus 
opened  out  to  us  in  the  use  of  our  symbols,  there  is  one 
which  deserves  particular  notice,  both  from  the  generality  of 
its  possible  application  and  the  special  nomenclature  to  which 
it  leads.  It  is  that  in  which  the  symbols  stand  for  proposi- 
tions, i.e.  for  their  truth  or  falsehood.  That  this  interpretation 
could  be  imposed  upon  the  symbolic  processes  did  not  escape 
the  penetration  of  Boole1.  He  seems  to  have  regarded  it 
however  as  yielding  a  perfectly  distinct  set  of  meanings  which, 
so  to  say,  happened  to  fit  in  with  his  method,  by  being  subject 
to  the  same  set  of  laws.  He  devotes  a  large  part  of  his 
volume  to  their  consideration,  under  the  head  of  '  secondary 

1  In  a  certain  sense  the  employ-  judgment   'all  a  is   b'   as  a  single 

ment  of  single  letters  to  denote  whole  element,  we  should  put  the  letter  a, 

propositions  has  often  been  adopted  say,  to  stand  for  it,  and  no.  to  stand 

in  Logic.    Some  writers  have  carried  for  its  contradictory.     Some  of  the 

this  out  very  systematically,  with  a  deductions  on  this  mode  of  notation 

special  notation  to  denote  the  con-  will  be  familiar  to   readers  of  De 

tradictory  of  any  proposition.    For  Morgan  and  other  modern  symbolists: 

instance, Haass (GrundrissderLogik,  e.g.  'when  /3  follows  from  o,  and  is 

1793)  has  used  Arabic  letters  to  stand  false,  then  a  must  be  false  too;  when 

for  ordinary  subjects  and  predicates  /3 follows  from  a,  y,  5...  together,  and 

and  Greek  letters  to  stand  for  whole  is  false,  then  o,  7,  5...  cannot  all  be 

judgments  or  propositions.    Thus,  if  true,  and  so  on'  (p.  126),  . 
we  wished  to  represent  the  whole 

24—2 


372 


Class  symbols  as  denoting  propositions.        [CHAP. 


propositions',  and  discusses  the  definitions  and  deduces  the 
laws  of  operation  independently  for  them,  as  he  did  at  the 
outset  for  the  more  familiar  application  to  classes  of  things. 
This  mode  of  treatment,  combined  with  his  rather  far-fetched 
and  unnecessary  doctrine  (as  it  seems  to  me)  that  propositions 
of  this  secondary  kind  were  somehow  interpretable  in  terms 
of  time,  has  probably  contributed  to  make  some  writers  for- 
get how  completely  Boole  had  grasped  the  possibility  of  this 
interpretation  of  his  symbolic  methods1.  There  is  much  in 


1  This  seems  to  me  to  be  the  case 
as  regards  the  scheme  of  Mr  H. 
Maccoll,  as  described  in  the  Proc.  of 
the  London  Math.  Society  (Vols.  ix., 
x.),  and  in  Hind,  No.  xvi.  After  a 
careful  study  of  it,  aided  by  a  long 
correspondence  with  the  author,  I 
am  unable  to  find  much  more  in  it 
than  the  introduction  of  one  more 
scheme  of  notation  to  express  cer- 
tain modifications  and  simplifications 
of  a  part  of  Boole's  system: — to  which 
however  one  exception  should  be 
made  in  respect  of  a  real  improve- 
ment in  notation  to  be  presently 
noticed.  That  he  should  have  worked 
it  out,  as  he  assures  us  is  the  case, 
in  comparative  ignorance  of  what  had 
been  already  done  in  this  way,  is,  no 
doubt,  proof  of  considerable  sagacity 
and  originality.  (The  general  view 
which  he  adopts  as  to  the  nature  of 
propositions  in  their  symbolic  treat- 
ment is  that  which  may  be  called  the 
implication  view  as  contrasted  with 
the  equation  view.  Some  account 
of  this  distinction  it  given  in  the 
concluding  chapter.) 

On  this  particular  point  the  case 


seems  to  me  to  be  as  follows.  Boole 
gave  two  distinct  interpretations  to 
his  symbols ;  in  one  of  these  x  is  re- 
garded as  a  class  of  things,  and  in  the 
other  as  a  proposition.  Those  who 
have  followed  in  his  steps  have, 
broadly  speaking,  confined  them- 
selves to  one  only  of  these  interpre- 
tations (or  rather  to  a  part  only  of 
one,  for  they  have  not  admitted  any 
special  signs  for  inverse  operations). 
Thus  Mr  Maccoll  makes  it  a  "cardi- 
nal point"  of  distinction  in  his  scheme 
that  "every  single  letter,  as  well  as 
every  combination  of  letters,  always 
denotes  a  statement",  and  this  he 
somehow  conceives  to  "necessitate 
an  essentially  different  treatment  of 
the  whole  subject".  Prof.  Jevons, 
on  the  other  hand,  though  not  ex- 
pressly defining  his  position  here, 
invariably  confines  his  interpretation, 
unless  I  am  mistaken,  to  what  may 
be  called  the  material  class  view  of 
the  symbols. 

My  only  complaint  against  Boole 
on  this  point  is  that  even  he  did  not 
generalize  sufficiently.  Doubtless  he 
directed  attention  to  what  are  far 


xviii.]        Class  symbols  as  denoting  propositions.  373 

his  treatment  of  this  part  of  the  subject  which  invites  criti- 
cism, but  as  we  are  here  concerned  with  Symbolic  Logic 
itself  rather  than  with  the  particular  opinions  held  by  its 
main  originator,  I  pass  these  by  wherever  it  is  possible. 

It  may  be  well  to  go  a  little  more  into  the  details  of  this 
interpretation,  starting  with  the  most  general  symbolic  state- 
ment where  two  terms  are  combined,  viz.  xy+xy+xy+xy=I. 
As  there  are  supposed  to  be  two  propositions  involved 
we  may  at  once,  for  the  sake  of  distinction  and  brevity, 
call  them  the  propositions  x  and  y.  "We  might  have  described 
the  propositions  as  A  and  B,  or  as  I  and  II,  respectively,  so 
as  to  employ  different  symbols  for  the  proposition  itself  and 
for  the  fact  of  its  being  true  ;  but  the  two-fold  application  of 
the  same  symbol  cannot  possibly  lead  to  confusion  in  the  pro- 
cesses of  working.  We  say  then  that  the  symbol  x  standing 
for  the  truth  of  the  one  proposition,  and  y  standing  for  that 
of  the  other,  the  left  side  of  the  symbolic  equation  represents 
the  only  four  possibilities.  Its  four  component  elements 
stand  for  the  truth  "of  both  propositions  (xy},  the  truth  of  # 
and  falsity  of  y  (xy),  the  truth  of  y  and  falsity  of  x  (xy),  and 
the  falsity  of  both  (xy). 

What  then  is  here  the  signification  of  unity,  or  1  ?  In  the 
general  formulas  as  hitherto  interpreted,  unity  stands  for  the 
sum-total  of  all  the  individuals  composing  all  the  possible 
classes,  in  other  words  for  our  universe.  The  best  verbal 
account  perhaps,  in  the  present  application,  is  given  by  say- 
ing that  it  stands  for  the  sum-total  of  possibilities  or  possible 
cases.  The  formula  asserts  that  the  four  cases  above  enume- 
rated, as  to  the  truth  and  falsity  of  x  and  y,  exhaust  the 
whole  field  of  possibilities.  Of  course  the  actual  limits  of 

the  most  important  interpretations,       is  potentially  an   indefinitely  wide 
but  I  prefer  to  regard  even  these  as      field  of  application, 
constituting  only  a  portion  of  what 


G7-A  Class  symbols  as  denoting  propositions.       [CHAP. 

this  field,  that  is,  of  this  universe,  have  to  be  assigned  on  the 
same  principles  as  in  the  more  familiar  case.  It  may  be  that 
the  propositions  are  necessarily  true  or  false,  in  which  case 
the  universe  is  altogether  unlimited.  It  may  be  that  they 
are  true  only  under  certain  conditions, — conditions  of  time,  of 
place,  of  circumstance,  or  what  not, — the  universe  of  possi- 
bilities is  then  limited  by  these  considerations.  The  deter- 
mination of  this  question  really  ranks  as  part  of  our  data ;  it 
is  one  of  the  elements  of  information  which  we  must  assume 
to  be  contributed  to  the  solution  of  the  problem ;  for  clearly 
the  general  symbolic  laws  can  no  more  throw  light  upon  the 
material  limits  within  which  they  are  to  be  held  to  apply, 
than  they  can  upon  the  special  signification  which  it  is  pro- 
posed to  assign  to  the  terms. 

So  with  the  sign  for  nothing,  or  0.  Just  as  it  is  elsewhere 
interpreted  'no  individual',  so  here  it  means  'no  possibility*. 
At  least  this  seems  the  best  verbal  translation ;  though,  as 
the  symbolist  has  to  reckon  with. the  grammarian,  he  is  often 
somewhat  put  to  it  in  trying  to  express  himself  unambiguous- 
ly and  yet  without  reproach.  We  may  say  then  that  x  —  0 
indicates  that  within  our  determinate  field,  that  is,  subject  to 
our  determinate  conditions,  there  is  no  possibility  for  the  pro- 
position x\  that  that  proposition  is  false.  So  x=  1  indicates 
that  there  is  nothing  but  such  possibility,  that  that  proposi- 
tion is  true.  It  will  be  seen  therefore  that  the  question 
whether  the  proposition  is,  in  common  parlance,  '  necessarily ' 
true  is  of  very  little  importance.  If  we  like  to  interpret  the 
symbol  1,  in  x  —  1,  as  meaning  'everywhere  and  always',  then 
x  may  be  regarded  presumably  as  a  necessary  proposition  ; 
if  we  interpret  it  as  meaning  '  at  some  specified  or  definite 
time  or  place,'  then  x  is  merely  empirically  true. 

The  reader  will  be  able  without  much  difficulty  to  work 
out  this  view  into  all  its  details.  He  must  bear  in  mind  that 


XVIIL]        Class  symbols  as  denoting  propositions.  375 

this  is  not  a  process  of  original  legislation,  but  simply  one  of 
interpretation.  We  are  not  recurring  to  the  business  of 
settling  the  general  employment  of  our  terms  and  operations; 
— this  was  done  once  for  all  at  the  outset  ;• — but  merely  con^ 
sidering  now  what  is  the  most  suitable  phraseology  for  trans* 
lating  and  describing  our  results  in  one  well-marked  and 
distinctive  group  of  cases.  We  see  at  once,  for  instance,  that 
x  +  x  =  1  should  be  interpreted  as  saying  that  either  a  propo- 
sition or  its  contradictory  must  certainly  be  true,  and  that 
xx  =  0  asserts  that  a  proposition  and  its  contradictory  cannot 
both  be  true.  Again  xy  =  1  (implying,  as  it  does,  x  =  1,  y  =  1) 
necessarily  leads  to  the  truth  of  both  propositions.  But  xy=0 
only  insures  the  denial  of  the  particular  compound  xy  ;  that 
is,  it  tells  us  that  both  propositions  cannot  be  true,  so  that  it 
leaves  three  possibilities  open ;  viz.  that  either  of  the  two,  or 
both  together,  may  be  false.  We  see  this  more  plainly 
by  looking  at  the  alternative  or  disjunctive  side.  From 
1  =  xy  +  xy  +  xy  +  xy  blot  out  xy,  and  we  have  as  remainder 
1  =  xy  +  xy  +  xy.  That  is,  if  we  deny  that  both  the  proposi- 
tions are  true,  we  are  reduced  to  the  three  alternatives,  that 
one  at  least,  or  both,  must  be  false.  Blot  out  xy  and  xy  and 
we  have  1  =xy  +  xy.  That  is,  if  we  can  deny  that  ' x  and  y 
are  both  true',  and  also  that  '  x  is  true  and  y  false',  we  are 
led  to  the  conclusion  that  either  x  is  false  and  y  true,  or  else 
that  x  is  false  and  y  false.  In  other  words  x  must  be  false, 
and'y  doubtful,  so  far  as  this  information  goes. 

In  proposing  'All  x  is  y'  and  'If  a;  is  true  y  is  true', 
respectively,  as  the  most  natural  pair  of  interpretations  of  the 
formula  xy  =  Q  (or  its  equivalents  x  =  xy,  x  =  $  y}  according 
as  we  submit  it  to  the  class  explanation  or  the  proposition 
explanation,  we  know  that  we  have  to  face  a  good  deal  of  ad- 
verse association.  The  two  interpretations  meet  the  shock 
at  somewhat  different  points ;  the  former  when  it  maintains 


376  Class  symbols  as  denoting  propositions.        [CHAP. 

that  'All  x  is  y'  covers  the  case  of  there  being  no  x  or  no  y, 
and  the  latter  in  maintaining  that  'If  cc  is  time  y  is  true' 
covers  the  case  of  y  having  no  connexion  whatever  with  x 
provided  only  y  is  known  to  be  true.  That  is,  the  former  has 
a  difficulty  in  carrying  the  extreme  values  x  =  0,  y  =  0,  and 
the  latter  in  carrying  the  extreme  value  y  =  1. 

The  general  propriety  of  admitting,  or  rather  the  necessity 
of  insisting  upon  the  admission  of,  both  these  extreme  values, 
has  been  fully  discussed  already  (see  chh.  VI.,  XVI.)  and  needs 
no  further  justification.  But  the  language  in  which  they  are 
sometimes  expressed,  upon  the  special  propositional  interpre- 
tation now  under  review,  needs  notice,  since  it  seems  to  me 
to  involve  a  needless  violence  to  popular  association.  We 
have  seen  that  we  can  stretch  the  language  of  hypothesis  in 
the  phrase  '  If  x  then  y '  to  reach  the  case  of  y  being  certain  : 
I  think  it  will  just  reach  this.  But  is  it  not  going  even 
further  to  try  to  do  the  same  with  the  word  implication  ? 
The  phrase  'x  implies  y1  surely  'implies'  that  the  facts  con- 
cerned are  known  to  be  connected,  or  that  the  one  proposition 
is  formally  inferrible  from  the  other. 

It  is  of  course  solely  to  the  word  'implication'  that  I  am 
objecting,  the  results  themselves  being  a  matter  of  symbolic 
necessity.  As  regards  the  particular  notation  employed  by 
Mr  Maccoll  (the  writer  here  principally  referred 'to)  one  ad- 
vantage must  be  admitted,  though  I  think  that  it  is  far  out- 
weighed by  the  general  advantages  of  the  system  mainly 
introduced  by  Boole.  He  expresses  'x  implies  y'  by  a;  :y,  and 
employs  an  accent  to  mark  negation,  so  that  x :  y  means  '  a? 
implies  the  contradiction  of  y\  Under  the  peculiar  interpre- 
tation of  'implication'  just  adverted  to,  the  formula  x  :y  be- 
comes the  precise  equivalent  of  iry  =  0  (and  its  substitutes 
x  =  xy,  x  =  $y);  for  the  meaning  of  any  one  of  these  formula) 
is  exhausted  when  we  have  said  that  it  excludes  x  not-y,  and 


xviii.]        Class  symbols  as  denoting  propositions.  377 

consequently  admits  the  three  remaining  alternatives.  The 
one  merit  of  Mr  Maccoll's  notation  is,  I  think,  in  the  sym- 
metry \vith  which  it  expresses  compound  implications ;  thus 
(x:y]-.(z:  w)  would  be  read  off  '  the  fact  that  x  implies  y 
implies  the  fact  that  z  implies  w',  with  of  course  the  same 
peculiar  interpretation  of  'implication'  all  through1.  It 
would  be  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  expression  of  com- 
pound implications  of  this  kind  is  in  any  way  restricted  to 
this  style  of  notation  : — as  has  been  already  shown,  our 
expression  of  the  same  relation  between  the  symbols  in 
question  is  (1  —  xy}  zw  =  0.  In  this  case  the  implicational 
mode  of  expression  certainly  tells  its  tale  more  simply  and 
obviously  ;  but  this  is  not  always  the  case.  For  instance,  the 
condition  (x  :  y)  (y  :  z) :  (x :  z]  is  read  off  '  the  combination  of 
the  implication  of  y  by  x,  and  z  by  y,  leads  to  the  implication 
of  z  by  x\  On  our  plan  of  expression  this  would  stand 
xz  =  xy .  z  +  as  .  yz.  This  expression  is  intuitively  obvious 
(remembering  that  y  +  y  =  l)  and  shows  the  dependence  of 
xz=Q  upon  xy  =  0  and  yz  =  Q  better,  to  my  thinking,  than 
the  other  rendering  does. 

It  was  intimated  at  the  outset  of  this  chapter  that  every 
statement  could  be  thrown  into  the  form  of  the  truth  of  some 
corresponding  proposition.  Whether  it  will  be  convenient  or 
not  to  adopt  this  plan  depends  upon  circumstances.  Some- 
times it  seems  to  be  a  matter  of  pure  indifference,  amounting 

1  The  earliest  attempt  at  the  ex-  (Versucli  einer  neuen  Logik,  p.  69), 

pression  of  compound  hypothetical  but  he  does  not  work  this  out  any 

propositions,   in   this  kind  of  way,  further.     The    first    to    attempt    it 

that  I  have  seen,   is  by  Maimon:  systematically  was  probably  K.  Grass- 

"Hypothetische  Satze  konnen  durch  mann  (Begriffslehre},  but  there  are 

das  algebraische  Yerhaltnisszeichen  decided  defects  in  his  procedure.   The 

(:)  angedeutet  werden. "     Thus,  with  neat    and  effective  rendering  of  a 

his  employment  of  +  to  mark  affirma-  number  of  compound  implications  of 

tion,  the  proposition  'If  a  is  b  then  this  description  is  the  best  feature  iu 

c  is  d '  is  represented  by  a  +  b  :  c  +  d  Mr  Maccoll's  papers. 


378  Class  symbols  as  denoting  propositions.        [CHAP. 

at  most  to  a  trifling  verbal  change,  sometimes  such  a  render- 
ing represents  a  distinct  economy  of  language  and  labour, 
sometimes  the  reverse.  As  an  instance  of  the  class  of  cases 
in  which  either  mode  of  interpretation  does  equally  well,  we 
might  take  the  following  :  — 

It  will  either  blow  a  gale  to-morrow  or  the  mail  will  start 

He  will  go  if  the  mail  starts. 

/.  If  he  does  not  go  it  will  blow  a  gale.  i 

This  may  be  written  out  symbolically,  thus, 


.'.  xz  =  0  or  0  =  §  x. 

(This  may  be  worked  out  as  follows  :  —  substitute  the 
value  of  y,  viz.  y  =  $z,  obtained  by  the  second  equation,  in 
the  first,  and  we  have  x  +  %  xz  =  1,  or  x  =  $  xz,  .'.  xz  =  Q.) 

Here  it  surely  represents  such  a  trifling  difference  as 
hardly  to  be  worth  notice  in  a  system  of  Logic,  whether  we 
say,  Let  x  represent  the  blowing  of  a  gale,  and  y  the  starting  of 
the  mail  ;  or  say,  Let  x  represent  the  proposition  that  it  will 
blow  a  gale  and  y  the  corresponding  proposition  about  the 
starting  of  the  mail. 

Now  consider  a  case  in  which  the  proposition  explanation 
seems  decidedly  less  appropriate.  Take  the  familiar  syllo- 
gism ;— 

No  B  is  C, 

All  A  is  B, 

:.  No  A  is  C. 

The  most  natural  course  here,  upon  the  prepositional  ex- 
planation now  under  discussion,  would  be  to  put  a  single 
symbol  for  each  of  these  propositions.  Let  them  be  repre- 
sented respectively  by  a,  y,  z  ;  so  that  x  =  1  is  to  assert  the 
truth  of  '  No  B  is  C',  y=l  that  of  '  All  A  is  B\  and  z  =  1 
that  of  '  No  A  is  C\  It  is  clear  that  we  are  at  once  brought 
to  a  complete  standstill  symbolically,  for  nothing  having  been 


xviii.]        Class  symbols  as  denoting  propositions.  379 

assigned  by  way  of  connexion  between  x,  y,  and  z,  no  conclu- 
sion about  one  of  them  can  be  elicited  from  the  other  two. 
If  from  x  =  0  and  y  =  0  we  could  infer  directly  that  ~z  =  0,  we 
should  have  produced  a  great  simplification ;  but  clearly  the 
only  way  of  deducing  this  is  to  go  through  the  syllogistic  pro- 
cess. If  we  did  this  we  should  be  found  to  be  taking  a  rather 
roundabout  course  by  introducing  any  special  symbols  for  the 
entire  propositions.  The  simplest  plan  would  of  course  be  to 
write  our  propositions  down  fully  in  the  ordinary  way,  putting 
x,  y,  and  z,  for  A,  B,  C  themselves  directly  instead  of  for  pro- 
positions about  them,  thus ; — 
=  0, 

=  Q,     .•.xz  =  Q-yz —  Q. 
For  these  represent  the  real  relations  between  the  proposi- 
tions, and  they  must  therefore  be  introduced  somehow  if  any 
conclusion  has  to  be  drawn. 

Accordingly  those  who  adhere  to  the  uniform  prepositional 
rendering  of  our  symbols  have  to  state  the  syllogism  some- 
what as  follows ; — Let  x  stand  for  the  statement,  .made  in 
reference  to  any  object,  'it  is  A',  y  for  'it  is  B\  z  for  'it  is  C\ 
The  premise  '  No  B  is  C'  then  takes  the  form  yz  =  Q  or  one 
of  its  equivalents  ;  '  All  A  is  J3'  becomes  xy  =  0,  and  so  on. 
In  fact  this  rendering  simply  gives  us  the  ordinary  symbolic 
statement  over  again,  with  a  slightly  different  and,  as  it  seems 
to  me,  more  cumbrous  interpretation  attached  to  it. 

The  cases  in  which  this  particular  interpretation  of  our 
symbols  is  distinctly  the  most  appropriate,  seem  to  me  to  be 
almost  confined  to  questions  of  Probability,  and  therefore  I 
pass  them  by  without  special  illustration.  In  the  works  of 
De  Morgan  and  Boole  a  variety  of  examples  will  be  found 
which  afford  convenient  exemplifications  of  the  modes  of 
combining  statements,  arguments,  and  reports  of  witnesses. 
It  was  indeed  for  the  purpose  of  improving  the  Calculus  of 
Probabilities  that, Book  mainly  worked  out  his  system,  ...  .^vi 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

VARIATIONS  IN  SYMBOLIC  PROCEDURE. 

IN  the  system  of  Symbolic  Logic,  as  we  have  throughout 
expounded  it,  nothing  amounting  to  what  may  be  called 
structural  variation  has  been  admitted  into  our  laws  of 
procedure.  Two  chapters  indeed  have  been  largely  devoted  to 
explaining  certain  extensions  of  the  interpretation  of  our 
terms,  but  the  laws  which  govern  the  combination  and 
arrangement  of  the  terms  have  been  preserved  unchanged. 
But  having  done  this  it  will  be  well  now  to  direct  attention 
to  some  other  ways  of  regarding  and  expounding  the  subject, 
in  which  changes  of  the  latter  kind  are  introduced.  These 
grow  out  of  three  different  causes  which  will  have  to  be  dis- 
cussed separately :  (1)  the  plan  of  writing  alternatives  in  the 
non-exclusive  fashion,  (2)  the  attempt  to  interpret  our  terms 
intensively  instead  of  extensively,  and  (3)  the  attempt  to 
extend  our  rules  so  as  to  embrace  what  is  called  the  Logic  of 
Relatives;  that  is,  of  relative  terms  as  distinguished  from 
mere  class  terms. 

I.     As  regards  the  first  of  these  departures  from  our  sys- 
tem something  was  said  in  the  second  chapter.     So  to  clear 


CHAP.  XIX.]     Variations  in  symbolic  procedure.  3SX 

the  ground  from  confusion  I  will  merely  remind  the  reader 
briefly  that  we  have  nothing  whatever  now  to  do  with 
questions  of  usage  in  popular  language,  or  of  logical  tradition. 
What  we  have  to  discuss  is  purely  a  question  of  symbolic 
procedure.  There  are  two  classes,  x  and  y,  before  us,  which, 
for  aught  we  know,  may  overlap  one  another ;  and  it  is  taken 
for  granted  by  all  parties  that  we  do  not  intend  to  reckon  the 
common  part  twice  over.  Is  it  better  to  express  the  whole 
class,  formed  by  the  aggregation  of  the  two,  in  the  form  of 
x  +  y  or  in  that  of  x  +  xy  ?  In  other  words,  shall  we  leave  it 
to  be  understood  that  the  common  part  xy  is  not  reckoned 
twice  over,  or  shall  we  explicitly  and  formally  reject  any  such 
double  reckoning  by  putting  our  symbolic  alternatives  into  a 
mutually  exclusive  shape  ? 

There  is  no  doubt  that  a  logical  system  can  be  developed, 
to  a  certain  extent,  upon  either  plan,  so  that  our  choice  turns 
upon  a  balance  of  comparative  advantages.  A  simple  ex- 
ample will  serve  to  illustrate  this.  It  is  of  course  universally 
agreed,  in  all  such  cases,  that  xx  =  x ;  that  is,  that  the  repeti- 
tion of  a  class-name  twice  or  oftener  leaves  the  class  un- 
altered. And  this  must  hold  equally  when  the  class  is  an 
aggregate,  built  up  of  alternatives  connected  by  and,  or,  and 
such  other  particles.  That  is,  we  must  secure  that 

(x  or  y]  (x  or  y]  =  (x  or  y). 

Suppose  it  were  laid  down  that  all  politicians  are  knaves  or 
fools,  and  that  all  in  office  are  so  too;  then  the  politicians  in 
office  are  expressed  by  (knaves  or  fools)  (knaves  or  fools),  and 
this  must  be  the  same  as  simply  (knaves  or  fools),  whatever 
may  be  the  symbolic  procedure  by  which  we  equate  these 
expressions,  and  whether  a  knave  can  be  a  fool  or  not.  This 
is  what  popular  thought  distinctly  contemplates,  and  the 
symbols  must  follow  suit,  so  far  at  least  as  their  final  result  is 
concerned. 


$82  Variations  in  symbolic  procedure.  [CHAP. 

But  although  the  final  result  is  not  affected  by  the  way  in 
which  we  connect  x  and  y,  yet  there  is  a  decided  difference 
in  the  process  of  reaching  that  result,  according  as  we  adopt 
one  plan  or  the  other.  On  Boole's  plan,  of  course,  when  we 
know  that  the  classes  x  and  y  are  not  exclusive,  or  do  not 
know  that  they  are  so,  we  write  (x  +  xy)  (x  +  xy).  The  ordi- 
nary processes  of  algebraic  multiplication  being  then  em- 
ployed (subject  to  the  one  bye-law,  xx  =  x}  we  have  at  once 
the  simple  result  (x  +  xy).  On  the  other  plan  we  start  with 
(x  +  y)  (x+y),  which  if  multiplied  out  by  the  same  rules 
would  yield  x  +  Zxy  +  y.  To  reduce  this  to  x  +  y  as  required, 
we  invoke  a  second  bye-law,  or  special  logical  restriction, 
expressible  in  the  words, — 'A  and  A  are  the  same  as  A\ 
Since  xy  is  a  part  of  x,  and  of  y,  the  logical  addition  of  it  to 
either  of  these  does  not  actually  add  anything;  the  apparent 
addendum  being  absorbed  without  enlarging  the  result.  This 
being  known  to  be  the  case  we  naturally  do  not  go  through 
the  form  of  fully  multiplying  out,  but  recognize  at  once  that 
the  addition  of  any  term  or  part  of  any  term  already  included 
in  a  given  aggregate  class,  is  altogether  inoperative. 

It  must  be  admitted  that  the  verdict,  so  far  as  regards  the 
number  of  writers  is  concerned,  is  against  Boole.  The  first 
proposer  of  the  'x  or  y\  as  contrasted  with  the  '  x  or  xy'  form, 
was  probably  Leibnitz1;  for  here,  as  on  so  many  other  logical 

1  "A+B&L  significat  A  inesse  nA  +  nA    nur    eine     Zeichenwieder- 

ipsi  L.vel  contineri  aL...Etsi.d  et  13  holung,  nicht  aber  eine  Sachwieder- 

habeant    aliquid    commune,    ita    ut  holung  ist  [a  clear  and  terse  way  of 

ambo  fiimul  sumta  sint  majora  ipso  putting  it]  so  komint  nA=m  +  b". 

L,  nihilominuB  locum  habebunt  qura  (Sammlung,  p.  254; — but  the  context 

hoc  loco  diximua  aut  dicemus"  (Spe-  involves  several  misconceptions.) 
cimen    demonstrandi,    Erdmann,   p.  To  tho8C  who  looked  upon  A  and 

94).  -B  as  standing  for  notions  or  attri- 

Ploucquet  again  says  much  the  lutes,    rather    than    for    classes,  it 

same.    Having  obtained  the  result  seems  to  me  that  such  a  view  as  this 

nA+nA-m  +  b,  hegoeson;  "daaber  was  most  natural,  and  indeed  almost 


xix.]  Variations  in  symbolic  procedure.  383 

points,  we  find  that  he  had  already  proffered  some  suggestive 
hints.  Prof.  Jevons  was  the  first  to  call  attention  promi- 
nently to  this  view,  in  his  Pure  Logic  (1864),  where  he 
pointed  out  the  duality  of  logical  formulae  which  resulted; 
i.e.  A  +  A  =  A,  and  AA  =  A.  A  much  [fuller  exposition  of 
this  dual  characteristic  was  given  by  R.  Grassmann,  who  in 
his  Begriffslehre  (1872)  has  worked  out  a  number  of  formulae 
in  illustration  of  the  parallelism  between  logical  multipli- 
cation and  logical  addition.  Mr  C.  S.  Peirce  has  adopted  the 
same  non-exclusive  mode  of  connecting  the  symbols  in  his 
various  papers.  So  has  Mr  Maccoll.  And  Prof.  Schroder  has 
recently  given  an  extensive  and  elegant  development  of 
Grassmanu's  results,  proceeding  on  the  same  general  plan, 
and  exhibiting  the  parallel  formulae  in  double  columns,  so  as 
to  bring  them  under  the  eye  at  a  glance  (Operationskreis  des 
Logikkalkuls,  1877).  To  these  may  be  added  Prof.  Wundt,  in 
the  short  account  which  he  has  given  (Logik,  1880)  of  the 
principles  of  Symbolic  Logic.  I  proceed  to  give  a  brief 
statement  of  my  reasons  for  preferring  the  Boolian  form 
adopted  in  this  work. 

(1)  In  the  first  place  then  we  thus  bring  our  logical 
usage  into  better  harmony  with  that  of  mathematics  generally. 
In  every  employment  of  symbols  it  seems  desirable  that  they 
should  be  employed  as  far  as  possible  with  mechanical  facility. 
Their  sense  may  be  varied  or  extended  from  time  to  time 
without  harm,  but  their  laws  ought  if  possible  to  be  retained 
unaltered.  It  may  be  urged  indeed  that  since  we  have 
already  introduced  one  innovation  we  ought  not  to  complain 
of  a  second;  that,  in  fact,  x  +  x  =  xis  no  more  of  a  license 

obligatory ;  the  non-repetition  of  the  driicke  die  eigenen  Merkmale  des  a 

attribute  is  only  a  case  of  "the  one  durch  a  \  b  aus,  und  die  eigenen  Merk- 

in  the  many".    Lambert,  however,  male  des  6  durch  b\a;  so  hat  man 

so  far  as  he  is  explicit  here,  rather  a\b  +  b  a  +  ab  +  ab=a  +  b"  (Log.  Ab* 

takes    the    opposite    view: — "man  Jfandlungen,  i.  11).         .  .  . 


384  Variations  in  symbolic  procedure.  [CHAP. 

than  xx  =  x.  The  cases  however  do  not  seem  to  me  to  be  at 
all  the  same,  the  former  being  far  the  more  serious  departure 
of  the  two.  Amid  all  the  various  significations  of  the  sign  + 
in  mathematics,  it  is  always  assumed  that  it  connects  ex- 
clusive symbols ;  that  is,  whether  A  and  B  be  magnitudes  or 
operations  or  anything  else,  in  A  +  B,  it  is  taken  for  granted 
that  B  begins,  so  to  say,  at  the  point  where  A  leaves  off,  or 
that  otherwise  the  common  part  is  doubly  reckoned.  To  depart 
from  this  usage  seems  therefore  a  more  serious  step  than  to 
confine  ourselves  to  what  is  after  all  merely  a  limiting  or 
special  case  of  a  general  formula. 

(2)  But  again  there  is  a  special  anomaly,  in  respect  of 
one  detail,  which  follows  from  this  usage.     If  x  +  x  =  x  gene- 
rally, it  must  also  hold  in  the  limiting  case  of  x  standing  for 
the  universe  of  discourse.    Accordingly  we  must  either  forego 
the  use  of  unity  for  this  universe  (which  offers  certain  decided 
advantages  for  this  purpose,  and  which  there  is  a  very  preva- 
lent consent  in  adopting)1,  or  we  must  face  the  direct  conflict 
with  all  arithmetical  association  implied  in  the  acceptance 
of  1+1  =  1. 

(3)  Again,   the   arrangement  in    mutual   exclusives  is 
much  more  convenient,  if  it  is  not  absolutely  necessary,  in 
many  applications  of  our  Logic.     I  have  said  more  than  once 
already  that  Logic  itself  is  concerned  only  with  the  relations 
of  classes  to  one  another,  or  with  their  existence  and  nou- 

1  I  have  already  pointed  out  that  and  ax  00= a.     Professor  Jevons,  in 

unity  is  not  invariably  used  as  the  his  later  works,  avoids  this  particular 

Bymboloftheuniverse(ch.vin.p.l89).  awkwardness,    but    at    the   cost    of 

But,  even  when  it  is  not,  some  of  introducing  a  new  symbol   (•[•)  in- 

the  results  that  have  to  be  faced  on  stead  of  ( + ).    He  reads  A-\-A  =  A; 

this  system  are,  to  say  the  least  of  it,  but  does  not,  I  think,  employ  any 

rather    startling.      Thus  K.  Grass-  special  symbol  for  the  logical  uni- 

mann   has   a  +  T=T,   and   aT=a't  verse, 
and  Mr  C.  S.  Pierce  has  a  +  »  as  o>, 


xix.]  Variations  in  symbolic  procedure.  385 

existence,  and  not  at  all  with  any  valuation  or  enumeration, 
of  their  contents.  But  nevertheless  when  we  come  to  apply 
our  formula  questions  of  number  or  quantity  may  have  to  be 
taken  into  account,  and  then  it  appears  absolutely  necessary 
that  each  sub-class  be  made  exclusive  of  all  the  rest.  Take, 
for  instance,  such  problems  as  those  of  which  Prof.  Jevons  has 
discussed  a  sample  under  the  name  of  Numerical  Logic 
(Pr.  of  Science,  p.  169),  as  any  of  those  which  play  so  large 
a  part  in  Mr  Macfarlane's  volume,  or,  still  more,  as  those 
problems  in  Probability  which  Boole  justly  regarded  as  the 
crowning  triumph  of  his  system.  I  have  avoided  discussing 
these  applications  myself,  because  they  seem  to  lie  outside 
the  bounds  of  strictly  Formal  Logic,  yet  they  certainly  are 
important  applications.  But  whenever  we  take  into  account 
the  number  of  individuals  included  in  x  or  y,  or  the  relative 
magnitude  in  extension  of  these  classes  to  one  another,  or  the 
numerical  probability  of  x  and  y  as  propositions,  in  such  an 
expression  as  x  +  y,  we  run  the  risk  of  counting  the  common 
part  twice  over.  Indeed  we  cannot  well  avoid  this  double 
reckoning  except  by  writing  the  aggregate  in  the  form  x  +  xy. 
But  if  many  applications  of  our  formula3  demand  this  caution, 
it  would  appear  that  this,  as  being  the  more  general  method, 
is  the  safest  and  best  to  adopt  throughout. 

(4)  But  there  is  another  reason  still,  which  seems  to  me 
the  strongest  of  all.  I  have  urged  throughout  that  the  prin- 
cipal merit  of  the  Symbolic  System  consists  in  the  speculative 
questions  to  which  it  introduces  us ;  the  nature  and  object  of 
symbolic  language,  as  such,  being  one  of  the  most  important 
of  these  questions.  Now  none  of  those  beautiful  generaliza- 
tions introduced  by  Boole, — such  as  the  formula  for  Develop- 
ment and  that  for  Elimination, — can  (so  far  as  has  yet  been 
shown)  be  admitted,  unless  we  adopt  his  principles  of  notation 
in  this  respect. 

V.  L.  25 


380  Variations  in  symbolic  procedure.  [CHAP. 

In  saying  this,  I  do  not  mean  that  these  formulae  cannot 
be  employed  up  to  a  certain  point  on  either  system  of  nota- 
tion. Indeed  we  have  shown,  in  a  former  chapter,  how  the 
formula  for  Development  is  a  convenient  means  of  deter- 
mining whether  or  not  a  class  expression  is  duly  stated. 
Thus  expand  x  +  y  and  we  obtain  the  element  2xy,  showing 
that  this  element  was  doubly  reckoned  ;  if  therefore  we  omit 
the  factor  2  from  it  the  result  will  be  in  accordance  with  the 
other  scheme.  That  is,  when  we  write  x  +  y  it  denotes  what 
both  parties  would  express  in  detail  by  xy  +  xy  +  2xy  •  when 
they  write  x  -f  y  it  denotes  what  both  parties  would  express 
in  detail  by  xy  +  xy  +  xy.  A  correction  therefore  has  to  be 
inserted  in  order  to  make  the  same  symbolic  rule  yield  these 
two  different  results.  But  this  being  the  case  it  is  hardly 
correct  to  speak  of  applying  the  same  formula  except  when 
the  original  elements  were  actually  exclusive,  whether  for- 
mally or  materially.  Thus  Boole's  rule  would  apply,  on  either 
system,  to  such  an  expression  asx  +  xy;  ortox  +  y  in  case 
we  happened  to  know  that  '  No  x  is  y',  but  not  otherwise1. 

Where  we  should  most  feel  our  loss  is  in  the  treatment  of 

1  As  a  further  illustration  of  the  (Of  course  if  both  xy  and  wz  vanish, 

Different  interpretation  which  results,  then  x  and  y,  as  also  z  and  w,  are 

when  the  same  expression  is  dealt  exclusives.)  Leibnitz  had  clearly  real- 

with  on  these  two  plans,  take  the  ized  the  fact  that  we  cannot  subtract 

following; — x  +  y  =  z  +  w.  Both  plans  in  Logic  except  when  we  are  dealing 

agree  up  to  a  certain  point,  in  re-  with  mutual  exclusives  ("incommu- 

garding  it  as  a  statement  that  the  nicantia").  Thus, "SiA  +  B<x>C  +  D, 

class  comprised  by  x  and  y  together  et  A  oo  C,  erit  B  oo  D,  modo  A  et  B 

is  the  same  as  that  comprised  by  itemque  C  et  D  sint  incommunican- 

z  and  w  together.    But  our  rules  de-  tia"  (Erdmann,  p.  96.  The  sign  oo 

mand  a  further  condition,  viz. ;  that  corresponds  to  our  =).    Again  on 

the  doubly  reckoned  part  must  also  the    same   principle   he   solves   the 

be  the  same,  that  is  (as  the  reader  problem,  "Sit  A  CD  A,  dico  reperiri 

will  BC3)  that  xy=zw,  as  we  fhould  posse  duo  B  et  N  sic  ut  B  non  sit 

otherwise  be  equating  disparate  things  oo  N  et  tamen  A  +  B  sit  oo  A  +  N"  (ib. 

in   case  they  do  not  both  vanish.  1)7). 


xix.]  Variations' in  symbolic  procedure.  387 

inverse  determinations.  Thus  the  power  of  subtraction  or 
exception  is  lost,  at  least  as  a  general  procedure.  For  in- 
stance, if  we  have  x  +  y  =  z  we  cannot  conclude  that  x  =  z  —  y 
unless  we  know  that  x  and  y  are  entirely  clear  of  one 
another.  We  should  have  to  substitute  x  =  z  —  xy  ;  in  other 
words  we  must  reintroduce  the  exclusive  mode  of  notation,  or 
abandon  the  right  of  transposing  a  term  from  one  side  to  the 
other  with  its  sign  changed.  Prof.  Schroder  meets  the  diffi- 
culty by  the  insertion  of  a  correcting  element  in  the  perform- 
ance of  the  subtraction.  Thus  "  (a  +  b)  —  b  =  a  —  ab  or  a  —  b ; 
correcting  element,  —  ab  or  —  b"  (Operationskreis,  p.  34)  ;  but 
by  others  the  right  of  subtraction  is  resigned. 

So  again,  we  lose  in  respect  of  the  analogue  of  division. 
Even  here  indeed  something  more  might  be  done  than 
actually  is  done  by  the  advocates  of  the  other  scheme.  There 
is  no  reason  whatever  why  the  explanation,  offered  in  the 
third  chapter,  should  not  be  retained  for  such  an  expression 

or 
as  - ,  so  as  to  develop  it  into  xy  +  ^xy,  if  the  aversion  to  the 

i/ 

employment  of  £  can  be  surmounted.  We  might  adopt  the 
same  treatment  with  more  complex  expressions,  for  instance 

- — « ,  if  we  first  retranslate  the  meaning  into  one  which  is 
oc  +  z 

consistent  with  the  non-exclusive  interpretation ;  though  here, 
as  in  a  paragraph  above,  we  cannot  be  said  to  employ  one  and 
the  same  really  general  symbolic  formula  in  the  two  cases 

/•»»    „_-,  nj 

respectively.     So  again,  with =  ,  we  might  say  that  what 

•  00 

x  —  y  means  is  '  x  which  is  not  y',  or  xy,  and  therefore  resolve 
the  fraction  into  the  correct  result  xy  +  $  xy.  But  in  all  such 
cases  the  necessity  of  the  retranslation  invalidates  the  true 
generality  of  the  formula/  (x}  =f  (1)  x  +f  (0)  x. 

Probably  more  than  this  could  be  done  to  introduce  the 

25—2 


388  Variations  in  symbolic  procedure.  [CHAP. 

employment  of  inverse  expressions,  and  to  make  partial  appli- 
cation of  Boole's  general  rules  to  their  treatment,  on  the  par- 
ticular scheme  now  under  notice.  But  naturally  those  who 
feel  independent  objections  to  that  scheme  will  hardly  find 
themselves  called  upon  to  work  it  out  in  detail.  The  general 
formula  for  Elimination,  f(l)f(Q)  =  0,  does  not  seem  to  be 
thus  capable  of  introduction  except  under  restrictions  which 
almost  amount  to  doing  without  it  altogether. 

What  then  are  the  advantages  of  the  non-exclusive  plan 
to  set  against  these  disadvantages  ?  Sound  and  thoughtful 
advocates  of  the  former  plead  as  follows  in  its  favour. 

(1)  For  one  thing  there  is  its  superior  brevity.     It  is 
decidedly  shorter  to  write  x  +  y  than  to  write  x  +  xy,  and 
when   we    throw  the    latter    into    the    symmetrical    form 
(xy  +  xy  +  xy)  the  contrast  is  greater  still.     And  this  dif- 
ference  would  be  increased  if  we  were   to   compare   such 
abbreviations  as  those  recently  introduced  by  R.  Grassmann, 
Prof.  Schroder,  and  Mr  Maccoll,  some  of  which  were  noticed 
in  the  last  chapter,  with  the  processes  by  which  Boole  did  as 
a  matter  of  fact  work  out  his  conclusions : — though  clearly 
such  a  comparison  would  not  be  a  fair  test  of  the  rival  plans 
of  notation.     I  quite  appreciate  the  value  of  such  brevity ; 
and  have  already  said  that  if  the  mere  attainment  of  results 
were  the  main  object  in  Logic,  as  is  more  nearly  the  case  in 
mathematics,  such  considerations  would  greatly  gain  in  weight. 
They  would  indeed  probably  turn  the  scale.     But  as  things 
are  in  Logic,  with  speculative  considerations  overwhelmingly 
preponderant,  I  attach  very  little  importance  to  mere  brevity 
of  procedure  ;  though,  as  the  reader  will  have  often  noticed  in 
the  course  of  this  work,  there  are  plenty  of  legitimate  re- 
sources for  avoiding  the  excessive  prolixity  of  Boole's  actual 
procedure. 

(2)  There  is  also  a  certain  speculative  attraction   in 


xix.]  Variations  in  symbolic  procedure.  389 

working  out  the  dualistic  symmetry  which  results  from  the 
two  rules  A  +  A=A,  and  AA=A.  The  reader  will  find 
these  given  in  some  detail  in  the  short  treatises  of  Grassmann 
and  Schroder1.  For  instance  the  formulae 

If  ab  =  a\  If        a  +  b 

then  a  +  b  =  6]  '  then         ab  =  a 

are  thus  correspondent  to  one  another.     So  again 

(a  +  u)  ~  =  au,  (aw)  ~  =  a  +  u. 

Such  problems  as  these  are  worth  working  through,  and 
are  arranged  with  much  skill  in  the  treatises  in  question2. 
To  myself,  I  confess,  this  multiplicity  of  interchangeable  and 
correspondent  formulas  is  somewhat  confusing  in  actual  calcu- 
lation. The  best  summary  advocacy  of  this  scheme  is  by 
Prof.  Schroder  :  "The  rejection  of  such  formulae  as  a  +  a,  as 
against  the  acceptance  of  aa,  is  altogether  unjustified,  in  that 
the  former  is  no  more  absurd  than  the  latter.  Moreover,  the 
introduction  of  these  formulae  is  of  indisputable  service  in 
the  abbreviation  of  our  expressions ;  and  they  are  universally 
employed  in  the  language  of  common  life.  Finally  they 
yield  the  advantages  of  this  dualism"  (Operationskreis, 
p.  37). 

Having  thus  stated  my  own  reasons  on  the  one  side,  and 
indicated  the  nature  of  those  on  the  other  side,  I  must  here 
leave  the  question  to  the  judgment  of  the  reader. 

1  Probably  De  Morgan  was  the  ib.  (p.  185). 

first  actually  to  point  out  this  duality  2  Schroder's  results  are  summed 

(Camb.  Phil.  Trans.  1858).     "Thus  up  thus  (p.  3): — "From  every  valid 

(A,  B)  and  A  B  have  ab  and  (a,  b)  for  general  formula  in  Logic  another  such 

contraries  (p.  203)".  It  deserves  notice  formula  must  be  derivable,  if  we  ex- 

however  that  when  he  translates  these  change  throughout  the  signs  of  plus 

expressions  into  mathematical  sym-  and  minus  lor  those  of  multiplica- 

bols  he  adopts  the  exclusive  notation,  tion  and  division,  and  also  the  sym- 

"And  (A,  £)  is  not  A  +  B,  but  A  +  B  bols  0  and  1". 
-  AB  ;  as  pointed  out  by  Mr  Boole" 


390  Variations  in  symbolic  procedure.  [CHAP. 

II.  The  next  question  for  consideration  is,  what  changes 
of  treatment  are  demanded  by  the  resolve  to  interpret  our 
terms  in  respect  of  their  intension,  instead  of  regarding  them 
(as  we  have  done  throughout)  extensively,  viz.  as  merely 
representing  classes.  I  must  say  at  once,  however,  that  the 
question  here  is  not  so  much  what  treatment  is  adopted 
as  what  ought  to  be  adopted,  since  it  is  very  doubtful  if 
there  has  ever  been  a  systematic  attempt  to  work  out  this 
view  in  detail.  That  there  have  been  claims  to  do  this,  and  a 
number  of  partial  attempts  in  this  direction,  the  reader  will 
have  gathered  from  various  notes  and  references  which  have 
been  given  from  time  to  time1.  My  main  object  for  going 
into  so  much  detail  here  is  to  explain  the  schemes  of  the 
authors  referred  to,  and  the  plans  of  notation  they  have 
adopted,  but  I  confess  that  the  attempt  to  carry  out  their 
scheme  seems  to  me  a  hopeless  one. 

In  order  to  come  to  a  clear  understanding  of  the  treat- 
ment thus  demanded  in  Symbolic  Logic,  we  shall  find  it  best 
to  try  back  a  little  so  as  to  ascertain  how  the  corresponding 
questions  have  been  decided  in  common  Logic.  Here  we  are 
at  once  involved  in  some  perplexity  owing  to  variety  of 
usage.  The  views  entertained  amongst  logicians  as  to  what 
is  the  meaning,  connotation,  or  intension  of  a  term,  range 
from  considering  it  to  beany  attributes, even  a  single  one,  by 

1  As  regards   the    treatment    of  on  the  one  side;— "In  diesem  giinz- 

symbolic  logic,   I  should   say    that  lichen  Absehen  vom  Inhalte  [intent] 

most  recent  writers  have  inclined  de-  der  Begriffe  liegt  nun  allerdings  eine 

cidedly  towards  the  extensive,  and  Einseitigkeit "  (Review  of  Frege  in 

most  of  the  older  writers  (less  de-  the  Zeits.  f.  Math.  u.  Phys.  xxv.  3), 

cidedly)  towards  the  intensive  inter-  and  Professor  Jevons  on  the  other; — 

pretation.    But  there  has  been  al-  "I    do    not    wish    to   express   any 

most  no  critical  discussion  of  the  opinion  here  as  to  the  nature  of  a 

distinction  between  the  two  views.  system  of  logic   in   extent"    (Pure 

Professor  Schroder  stands  probably  Logic,  p.  2). 
alone  in  perfectly  explicit  statement 


xix.]  Variations  in  symbolic  procedure.  391 

which  the  things  denoted  by  the  term  can  be  distinguished 
from  others,  up  to  considering  it  to  embrace  every  attribute 
possessed  by  that  class  in  common.  Fortunately  however  for 
our  present  purpose  almost  any  of  these  views  (except  the 
extreme  ones)  will  answer  equally  well ;  that  is,  will  call  for  a 
precisely  similar  mode  of  treatment.  We  shall  have  indeed 
to  make  a  postulate,  and  one  which  does  not  altogether  coin- 
cide with  facts,  but  without  which  no  such  thing  as  a  Science 
of  Logic  could  possibly  exist.  This  postulate  is  that  there  is 
a  common  agreement  as  to  what  attributes  form  the  intension 
of  a  term.  Whether  this  intension  comprise  few  attributes 
or  many,  and  whatever  the  principle  in  accordance  with  which 
they  are  selected,  we  postulate  that  all  the  people  whom  we 
take  into  account  are  agreed  as  to  what  these  attributes  shall 
be.  We  have  to  insist,  in  fact,  upon  what  may  be  called  a 
sort  of  universe  of  reasoners,  just  as  we  insist  upon  a  universe 
of  discourse  within  which  we  reason.  Of  course  this  is  not 
strictly  justified  in  fact,  for  hardly  any  two  people  agree 
exactly  as  to  what  a  name  really  'means',  but  some  such 
postulate  seems  forced  upon  us,  if  we  want  to  rise  out  of 
a  mere  description  and  comparison  of  beliefs  entertained,  into 
a  Formal  Science  of  Logic.  Otherwise  we  could  have  no 
general  definitions,  and  any  distinction  between  the  essential 
and  the  accidental  would  be  lost. 

By  the  intension,  connotation,  or  logical  meaning  'of 
a  term  I  understand  then  a  group  of  attributes;  and  we 
postulate  that  people  are  agreed  as  to  the  constituent 
members  of  every  such  group.  What  we  now  want  to  do  is 
to  compare  the  meaning,  arrangements,  expression,  and 
so  forth,  of  propositions  when  looked  at  from  this  point 
of  view,  with  those  yielded  by  looking  at  them  from  the 
point  of  view  of  extension.  But  we  have  already  examined, 
in  the  first  chapter,  the  outcome  of  a  rigid  class  interpretation 


392  Variations  in  symbolic  procedure.  [CHAP. 

of  propositions;  all  that  is  now  wanted  for  the  purpose 
of  comparison  is  therefore  an  equally  rigid  intensive  inter- 
pretation. 

Recalling  the  results  of  the  first  chapter,  we  there  saw 
that  if  we  take  two  classes  or  extensions,  A  and  B,  and 
examine  the  possible  relations  in  which  they  may  stand 
to  one  another,  we  find  that  there  are  five,  and  only  five  such 
relations.  For  the  relation  may  be  that  of  the  inclusion 
of  A  by  Bt  of  B  by  A,  their  partial  inclusion  of  each  other, 
their  mutual  exclusion,  and  their  coincidence.  When  how- 
ever we  regard  A  and  B  as  groups  of  attributes  we  can  see 
our  way  to  only  four  of  these  relations,  but  the  parallel 
in  their  case  seems  at  first  sight  tolerably  close. 

One  group  of  attributes  may  include  or  exclude  another, 
partially  or  wholly,  just  as  a  class  of  concrete  objects  may  do: 
which  appears  to  afford  four  relations  of  the  kind  we  seek : 
but  can  one  such  group  coincide  with  another  and  yet 
be  recognized  as  a  distinct  entity  from  it  ?  I  think  not,  and 
therefore  the  frequency  with  which  such  a  relation  is  verbally 
admitted1  by  those  who  speak  a  pure  Conceptualist  speech 
seems  to  me  a  sign  with  what  little  consistency  this  view 
is  adopted.  There  is  the  widest  possible  distinction  between 
the  extension  and  the  intension  in  this  respect.  As  regards 

1  For    instance,    many    German  den  gleichen  Umfang  haben "  (Loyik, 

logicians  refer  to  this  relation  under  p.  28).    Some  again  more  consistent- 

the  name  of  "Wechselbegriffe",  the  ly,  as  I  should  say,  deny  the  possi- 

liegriff  being  composed  of  Merkmale  bility  of  equivalent,  as  distinguished 

and    therefore    by    rights    abstract.  from  identical  concepts.    Thus  Bach- 

But  what  they  actually  understand  mann,  "  Wer  in  B  nicht  mehr  und 

by  them  are  generally  two  concepts  nicht  wenigcr  dcnkt  als  A,  der  denkt 

whoso  extension  happens  to  be  the  eben  A ;  und  li,  der  genau  dieselben 

name,  whatever  their  marks  may  be.  Merkmale  hat  wie  A,  ist  eben  A, 

Beneke,  e.g.  plainly  says  so,    "In  weil   es   von   diesem   durch    nichts 

Hinsicht  auf  den  Umfang  nennt  man  unterschieden  werden  kanu"  (Logik, 

die  Begriffe  Wechselbegriffe  wenn  sic  p.  111). 


xix.]  Variations  in  symbolic  procedure.  393 

the  former  we  saw  that  the  case  of  coincidence  might  fairly 
be  recognized  as  a  distinct  one ;  for,  though  the  individuals 
included  were  identical,  we  could  conceive  their  being  called 
up  under  different  names  and  by  reference  to  different  attri- 
butes. Hence  'All  A  is  all  B'  is  not  necessarily  an  identical 
proposition.  But  when  A  and  B  are  groups  of  attributes 
their  coincidence  merges  into  absolute  identity;  for  these 
being  results  of  Abstraction,  every  distinguishing  character- 
istic has  been  stripped  off  them.  So  we  do  not  obtain  what 
we  can  represent  as  an  'All  A  is  all  B'  proposition,  but 
rather  an  'All  A  is  all  A'  proposition. 

When  however  we  come  to  work  out  the  scheme  of.  pro- 
positions demanded  by  this  way  of  interpreting  our  terms, — or 
rather  our  'concepts',  as  we  will  call  them,  in  order  to  use  an 
appropriate  conceptualist  expression, — we  find  that  the  ap- 
parent parallel  is  very  far  from  holding  throughout.  The 
two  cases  indeed  of  entire  inclusion  seem  to  repeat  themselves 
on  either  interpretation;  for,  if  the  concept  A  is  a  part  of  B, 
we  have  the  proposition  'All  B  is  A',  and  conversely  if  B  be 
a  part  of  A.  But  the  remaining  two  cases  exhibit  a  wide 
divergence.  For  instance,  if  the  concepts  A  and  B  are 
partially  the  same,  we  shall  most  likely  find  that  this  gives 
rise,  not  to  a  'Some  A  is  B',  but  to  a 'No  A  is  B'  proposition, 
for  the  presence  of  a  single  really  differentiating  attribute  on 
each  side  is  sufficient  to  separate  entirely  the  classes  A 
and  B.  On  the  other  hand,  even  though  the  concepts  A  and 
B  have  not  a  single  element  in  common  we  shall  not  neces- 
sarily obtain  an  ordinary  universal  negative,  for  attributes 
may  be  quite  distinct  and  yet  compatible  with  each  other. 
In  fact  we  might  even  have  an  'All  A  is  all  B'  in  such 
a  case.  Thus  'existent  marsupial'  and  'large  quadruped 
indigenous  to  Australasia '  comprise  very  distinct  groups  of 
attributes  but  denote  approximately  coincident  groups  of 


39-i  Variations  in  symbolic  procedure.  [CHAP. 

things;  whilst  'men  under  thirty'  and  'men  over  thirty'  have 
every  essential  point  in  common  with  only  one  divergence, 
and  yet  denote  entirely  distinct  groups. 

It  is  clear  then  that  the  arrangement  of  propositions  in 
accordance  with  this  scheme  is  of  a  somewhat  peculiar  kind. 
It  will  be  most  easily  carried  out  by  the  aid  of  a  little 
symbolic  notation.  Suppose  then  two  concepts  A  and  AB, 
where  the  extra  intension  indicated  by  B  is  of  course  not 
contradictory  of  A.  Give  these  concepts  the  names  P  and 
Q  and  we  have  the  ordinary  universal  affirmative,  All  Q  is  P. 
Had  the  names  P  and  Q  been  inverted  we  should  have  had 
the  similar  proposition  All  P  is  Q.  Now  suppose  that 
the  concepts  had  been  AB  and  AC,  we  see  at  once  that  we 
cannot  with  certainty  conclude  any  ordinary  proposition  from 
this,  in  the  absence  of  information  as  to  the  mutual  relations 
of  B  and  C.  If  B  and  C  are  really  contradictory,  so  that  they 
might  be  written  pq  and  pq,  then  we  conclude  that  No  P  is 
Q.  If  B  includes  C,  so  that  these  might  be  written  p  andpq, 
then  we  know  that  All  Q  is  P,  and  similarly  if  C  includes  B. 
If  however  B  and  C  are  really  distinct  in  their  meaning,  so 
that  one  cannot  be  shown,  in  the  present  state  of  our  know- 
ledge, to  be  a  part  of  the  other,  then  no  proposition  whatever 
can  with  certainty  be  elicited  out  of  these  concepts  AB  and 
AC.  As  regards  concepts  which  are  entirely  distinct  from 
each  other,  say  A  and  B,  the  remark  just  made  may  be 
repeated  verbatim.  Without  further  analysis  of  A  and  B, 
and  discovery  of  identities  or  contradictions  in  the  constituent 
elements,  no  proposition  of  the  ordinary  kind  can  with  confi- 
dence be  enunciated. 

One  or  two  remarks  may  be  added  in  explanation  of  the 
above  analysis.  It  will  be  seen  that  the  only  universal  pro- 
positions which  can  thus  effect  an  entrance  are  those  called 
verbal,  necessary,  analytic,  or  essential.  Given  A  and  AB  as 


xix.]  Variations  in  symbolic  procedure.  395 

concepts,  it  is  inevitable  that  we  should  conclude  that  'All 
AB  is  A\  So  in  the  case  of  universal  negatives.  If  A  and 
B  can  be  analysed  into  say  pq  and  pq,  it  is  equally  inevitable 
that  '  No  A  is  B\  From  the  former  by  conversion,  a  particular 
proposition  can  be  inferred,  provided  of  course  that  we  under- 
stand '  some'  in  its  ordinary  sense  of  ' some  at  least',  for  we  can 
infer  that '  Some  A  is  AB'.  As  regards  those  universal  pro- 
positions which  are  accidental,  I  cannot  see  that  they  have 
any  right  to  admission  on  such  a  scheme  as  this,  where  we 
start  from  concepts  and  their  intension.  For  example,  'All 
American  citizens  know  the  name  of  their  President' :  how 
can  we  fairly  interpret  this  with  strictness  from  the  side  of 
its  intension  ?  Surely  on  no  admissible  sense  of  the  term  can 
this  incident  be  regarded  as  a  part  of  the  intension  of  'Ameri- 
can'; nor  have  we  any  thought  of  making  it  such  for  the 
future,  and  so  agreeing  to  enlarge  the  intension.  If  the  fact 
were  new  to  us  the  most  we  should  do  would  be  to  take  a 
note  of  it,  so  as  to  regard  this  mark  as  an  accidental  one  of  all 
individual  Americans. 

I  am  aware  that  some  logicians  would  explain  that  what 
is  meant  in  such  a  case^as  the  above  is  that  we  are  to  'attach' 
(or  something  equivalent  to  this)  the  new  attribute  to  the  old 
group,  without  however  regarding  it  as  any  part  of  the  essence 
or  intension.  I  really  do  not  know  exactly  what  this  can 
mean.  The  sole  bond  of  coherence  in  the  attributes  con- 
sists in  the  fact  of  our  keeping  the  members  of  it  together  in 
our  minds,  so  that  if  a  new-comer  takes  up  its  permanent 
abode  amongst  them,  it  obtains  thenceforth  every  right  of 
occupancy  which  they  possess.  An  attribute  attached  to  a 
group  of  attributes  is  one  of  the  group.  At  least  I  can  see 
no  ground  for  disputing  this  unless  we  admit  Kant's  doctrine 
as  to  the  existence  of  a  priori  synthetic  judgments. 

The  general  position  adopted  here  will  not,  I  hope,  be 


396  Variations  in  symbolic  procedure.  [CHAP. 

misunderstood.  I  hold  very  decidedly  that  all  names  (with 
certain  trifling  exceptions  which  need  not  be  specified)  possess 
both  intension  and  extension,  and  that  we  may  conceivably 
examine  the  mutual  relations  of  terms,  and  through  these 
develop  a  system  of  propositions  and  of  reasonings,  from  either 
of  these  two  sides.  Popular  speech  appears  to  adopt  an  inter- 
mediate course,  not  adhering  strictly  to  either  of  these  sides. 
In  this  it  has  been  followed,  and  very  rightly  so,  by  the  tra- 
ditional Logic,  which  appears  to  me  (broadly  speaking)  to 
prefer  regarding  the  subject  in  respect  of  extension  and  the 
predicate  in  respect  of  the  attributes  which  it  conveys.  This 
is  certainly  the  view  which  I  should  endeavour  to  work  out 
if  I  were  composing  a  systematic  work  upon  the  ordinary 
lines. 

When  however  we  develop  a  system  of  Symbolic  Logic  we 
are  forced  to  be  more  consistent  in  our  adherence  to  one  side 
or  the  other,  for  symbols  do  not  readily  tolerate  an  uncertain 
and  hesitating  attitude.  The  question  therefore  is,  which 
view  we  had  best  adopt.  In  this  choice  I  cannot  hesitate  for 
a  moment,  and  it  must  be  left  to  the  reader  to  judge  by  the 
whole  drift  of  this  work  how  far  the  decision  is  justified.  In 
fact  as  regards  the  alternative  view,  we  cannot  so  much  say 
that  it  has  broken  down  on  trial,  as  that  it  never  has  been 
fairly  tried  at  all. 

We  shall  see  this  best  by  examining  the  most  appropriate 
usage,  on  this  plan,  of  some  of  the  now  familiar  signs  of  our 
logical  operations.  Begin  with  the  sign  (+).  If  A  and  B  are 
attributes  or  partial  concepts,  we  should  I  presume  agree  in 
saying  that  A  +  B  will  signify  those  attributes  '  taken  to- 
gether'. But  when  we  go  on  to  enquire  what  is  meant  by 
taking  attributes  together  we  perceive  that  this  is  a  very 
different  thing  from  taking  classes  together.  The  only  con- 
sistent meaning  surely  is  that  we  do  this  when  we  construct 


xix.]  Variations  in  symbolic  procedure.  397 

a  new  concept  which  contains  them  both.  But  this  is  clearly 
the  analogue  not  of  addition  but  of  multiplication.  Thus  let 
'man'  be  'rational  animal';  it  would  naturally  be  said  that 
the  concept  humanity  is  made  up  of  the  attributes  rationality 
and  animality  taken  together.  This  clearly  results  in  a  pro- 
cess of  restriction  in  extension  such  as  we  have  throughout 
indicated  by  A  x  B  and  not  by  A  +  B.  In  fact  '  extensive 
multiplication'  corresponds  to  'intensive  addition1'. 

So  again  with  the  subtractive  sign.  There  can  be  little 
doubt  that  the  most  natural  and  appropriate  employment  of 
it  here  would  be  to  indicate  abstraction  rather  than  exception. 
Reverting  to  the  same  example,  the  subduction  of  'rationality' 
from  'humanity'  would  leave  '  animality',  and  this  process  is 
precisely  that  which  logicians  mean  by  abstraction  :  does  not 
indeed  the  very  etymology  of  the  word  suggest  the  taking  of 
one  attribute  from  others  just  as  we  remove  one  material 
object  from  a  group  ?  Now  logical  abstraction,  when  modified 
so  as  to  bring  it  into  accordance  with  our  class  interpretation, 
was  seen  to  correspond  to  the  process  which  we  mark  by 
A  -r-  B  rather  than  A  —  B.  This  is,  in  fact,  exactly  what 
Leibnitz  does,  in  a  passage  referred  to  in  the  Introduction, 
when  he  makes  (man)  —  (rational)  =  (brute). 

1  It  deserves  notice  that  the  sign  slight  suggestion.    This  was  appar- 

of  addition  has  actually  been  em-  ently  the  only  employment  of  these 

ployed  for  this  purpose.     Thus  Ha-  signs  which  had  come  under  Tren- 

milton    (whose    usage    however    of  delenburg's  notice,   and    forms    the 

mathematical  terms  and  symbols  is  ground  of  his  objections  to  their  in- 

almost  always  an  indication  of  some-  troduction  into  Logic  (Logische  Un- 

thing  not  to  be  done)  has  said,  "The  tersuclmngen  I.  20). 

concept  as  a  unity,  is  equal  to  the  cha-  It    may  interest    the   mathema- 

racters  taken  together,  Z=a  +  b  +  c"  tician  to  remark  that  'addition'  of 

(Logic  I.   80).      And    he    has    had  attributes  is  like  that  of  powers  or 

predecessors  here,  for  instance  Twes-  logarithms;  it  performs  'multiplica- 

ten   (Logik  p.  211),    who   has  also  tion '  of  extension  and  therefore  does 

used  the  minus  sign  for  Abstraction ;  not  leave  any  convenient  opening  for 

but  neither  of  these  is  more  than  a  the  mere  addition  of  the  same. 


398  Variations  in  symbolic  procedure.  [CHAP. 

On  the  whole  then  it  seems  that  a  consistent  intensive 
interpretation  would  find  an  opening  for  the  symbols  +  and  — , 
but  that  it  would  use  them  for  the  purpose  of  expressing, 
(approximately  only,  in  the  case  of  the  latter),  operations 
which  we  have  indicated  by  x  and  -=-.  And  those  operations 
which  we  denote  by  +  and  —  it  would  not  find  any  place  for, 
nor  therefore  for  symbols  to  represent  them. 

It  need  hardly  be  remarked  that  this  is  not  the  course 
which  has  been  actually  adopted.  Nearly  all  logicians,  so  far 
as  I  know,  have  consulted  convenience  at  the  expense  of 
rigid  consistency,  and,  whenever  they  have  employed  these 
four  simple  arithmetical  signs,  have  done  so  in  a  way  more  in 
harmony  with  that  adopted  in  this  work.  Their  words  have 
been  the  words  of  the  conceptualist,  but  their  deeds  have 
been  mostly  those  of  the  nominalist.  Hence  their  language 
is  often  tinged,  and  their  usage  modified, — especially  in 
the  case  of  the  older  symbolists, — in  a  way  which  it  would 
be  very  difficult  to  understand  unless  we  keep  in  mind  the 
characteristics  of  the  system  which  they  nominally  professed1. 
The  reader  will  find  plenty  of  illustrations  in  support  of  this 
remark  in  the  historical  references  in  the  next  chapter.  My 
main  object  in  fact  in  making  the  present  remarks  is  to  aid 
in  the  intelligent  study  of  some  of  those  anticipations  of 
modern  results. 

Whatever  such  writers  may  have  said,  what  they  have 
actually  done  has  been  briefly  this.  They  have  taken  the 
sign  +,  say,  and  employed  it,  not  to  connect  real  attributes. 

1  One  example  may  be  given  here  intensive  interpretation ;  whereas  ire 
from  Lambert:  "Die  Redensart,  'A  should  proceed  to  represent  'A  which 
BO  nicht  in  ist, '  wird  BO  gezeichnet  is  not  m'  extensively  in  some  such 

A        .  way  as  A  -  Am  or  A  -  m.     Elsewhere 
- ,  veil  nun  m  von  A  als  erne  Modifi-  T      ,     .  ,  .       ... 
m  Lambert  himself  has  used  this  sub- 
cation  von  ihrer  Substanz  kann  ab-  tractive  sign  very  nearly  as  we  do. 
Btrahirt  werden."    This  is  a  purely 


xix.]  Variations  in  symbolic  procedure.  399 

but  rather  the  extensions  referred  to  by  those  attributes. 
They  may  have  defined  in  a  way  which  would  have  led  to  the 
expression  '  rationality  +  animality',  but  what  they  have 
really  intended  to  do  was,  not  to  combine  these  two  attributes 
or  concepts  into  a  more  determinate  concept,  but  to  obtain  a 
concept  whose  extent  should  be  equal  to  that  of  the  other 
two  together.  And  a  similar  explanation  would  apply  to 
their  usage  of  the  other  three  signs.  This  I  cannot  but  re- 
gard as  an  awkward  way  of  expressing  ourselves,  as  compared 
with  saying  at  once  that  A  and  B  and  our  other  terms  stand 
directly  for  classes  of  things.  Moreover  this  want  of  harmony 
between  theory  and  practice,  produces,  as  it  seems  to  me,  a 
perpetually  recurring  confusion  and  inaccuracy  in  matters  of 
detail 1. 

III.  The  third  of  the  symbolic  variations  to  be  here  noticed 
stands  upon  a  very  different  footing,  and,  if  admitted,  would 
involve  far  more  serious  changes  than  any  which  we  have  yet 
contemplated.  The  best  way  of  introducing  the  question 
will  be  by  referring  to  a  simple  example  of  a  kind  familiar  to 
every  student  of  Logic.  For  instance,  every  beginner  has 
learnt  to  avoid  the  pitfall  of  attempting  to  syllogize  from  two 
such  premises  as  'A  is  equal  to  B',  1B  is  equal  to  C".  He 
sees  that  however  certain  and  obvious  the  step  may  be,  we 
cannot  avoid  resorting  to  four  terms,  instead  of  three,  in 
stating  these  premises  according  to  strict  rule.  If  we  adhere 
to  the  correct  logical  copula,  'is',  we  have  in  one  premise  the 
term  B,  and  in  the  other  premise  'an  equal  to  B'.  Accor- 

1  The  nearest  approach,  perhaps,  any  serious  recognition  of  what  ap- 
to  a  consistent  intensive  interpreta-  pear  to  be  the  insurmountable  dif- 
tion  is  to  be  found  in  Hamilton's  ficulties  of  carrying  out  this  inter- 
attempt  to  translate  judgments  and  pretation  in  the  case  of  universal 
reasonings  in  this  way  as  well  as  propositions  when  accidental,  or  of 
extensivsly.  But  I  cannot  find  there  any  ordinary  particular  propositions. 


400  Variations  in  symbolic  procedure.  [CHAP. 

dingly,  on  the  common  system,  we  have  either  to  reject  such 
examples,  or  else  to  admit  them  under  what  is  little  better 
than  a  subterfuge.  We  have  to  abandon  any  analysis  of  the 
process  by  which  every  mind  does  as  a  matter  of  fact  proceed, 
(viz.  from  B  to  its  equal,)  and  to  throw  the  real  process 
of  reasoning  into  the  major  premise,  by  assuming  that  all 
things  which  are  equal  to  the  same  thing  are  equal  to  one 
another. 

What  the  so  called  Logic  of  Relatives  seems  to  aim  at  is 
to  frame  a  set  of  rules  which  shall  deal  directly  with  reason- 
ings of  this  kind ;  or,  in  other  words,  shall  take  account  of 
relations  generally,  instead  of  those  merely  which  are  indicated 
by  the  ordinary  logical  copula  'is'.  It  would  be  quite  im- 
possible to  treat  this  question  in  a  portion  of  a  single  chapter; 
so  the  reader  must  understand  that  I  am  here  only  making  a 
few  remarks  upon  a  subject  which  cannot  well  be  passed 
entirely  by,  But  which  would  need  a  separate  work  for  its 
adequate  discussion. 

Suppose  then  that  we  have  the  relation  assigned  of 
A  to  B,  and  of  B  to  C,  and  that  we  wish  to  determine  the 
relation  of  A  to  C,  how  should  we  proceed  ?  Symbolically  we 
find  no  difficulty  in  starting.  Express  the  relations  in  the 
form  A  =  L1B,  B  =  LiC,  and  the  conclusion  will  be  repre- 
sented by  A  =  LI  (LJJ)  if  we  want  A  in  terms  of  C, 
or  C  =  L~l  (L~1A}  if  we  want  C  in  terms  of  A.  But,  as  the 
reader  knows  by  this  time,  symbolic  representation  of  a 
desired  result  is  by  no  means  a  performance  of  the  desired 
process,  nor  is  it  even  an  assurance  that  that  process  admits 
of  performance.  Accordingly  what  we  have  to  do,  if  we  are 
to  take  any  steps  whatever  towards  our  aim,  is  to  ascertain 
the  rules  according  to  which  the  Ll  and  Lz  of  the  above 
formulae  can  be  analysed  and  compounded.  As  soon  as  we 
proceed  to  do  this  we  find  that  instead  of  one  simple  and  uni- 


xix.]  Variations  in  symbolic  procedure.  401 

form  set  of  rales,  as  in  the  system  hitherto  expounded,  we 
are  introduced  to  a  most  perplexing  variety  of  them. 

Begin  with  the  simplest  case,  by  supposing  that  the  two 
relatiojas  in  the  premises  are  the  same,  may  we  conclude  that 
L(LA)  —  LA,  in  accordance  with  the  familiar  rule  of  our 
logic,  that  xx  =  #?  Certainly  not,  as  a  general  rule;  for 
though,  as  is  abundantly  obvious,  'equal  of  (equal  of  A)' 
is  equivalent  to  'equal  of  A',  and  'brother  of  (brother  of  A}' 
is  equivalent  to  'brother  of  A',  (provided  we  assume  that  a 
man  may  be  his  own  brother),  yet  this  is  a  very  exceptional 
state  of  things,  and  accordingly  one  great  resource  in  our 
logical  procedure  has  to  be  given  up.  If  we  attempted 
to  ""make  any  set  of  rules  here  at  all,  we  should  be  forced 
to  subdivide,  by  assigning  to  a  separate  class  all  those  cases 
in  which  LL  =  L,  (these  are  what  De  Morgan  has  termed 
transitive  relations).  Having  done  this,  we  should  find  further 
subdivisions  awaiting  us.  For  instance  there  is  one  kind  of 
relation,  and  for  logical  purposes  one  of  extreme  importance, 
in  which  all  odd  powers  of  L  are  equivalent,  and  also  all 
even  powers,  but  these  are  distinct  from  each  other.  Let  L 
represent  'contradiction  of,  and  it  is  plain  that  L*=L*=etc.  =  I. 
That  is,  if  A  be  a  statement,  then  LLA  =  A,  and  so  on.  But 
after  having  thus  distinguished  these,  and  possibly  other 
similar  special  cases,  we  should  be  left  with  a  bulk  of 
relations  on  our  hands  which  admitted  of  no  simplification  of 
this  kind,  and  which  had  to  be  left  in  the  merely  symbolic 
form  LLA,  or  its  equivalent'  L?A,  when  twice  repeated. 

Again,  we  know  what  perpetual  recourse  has  to  be  made 
to  the  commutative  law,  xy  —  yx.  Does  this  hold  of  relations  ? 
Certainly  not,  as  a  general  rule,  though  presumably  'father 
of  grandfather'  is  equivalent  to  'grandfather  of  father'.  But 
'father  of  a  brother'  is  very  different  from  'brother  of  a 
father';  in  fact  it  would  not  be  easy  to  hit  upon  relations 
V.  L.  26 


402  Variations  in  symbolic  procedure.  [CHAP. 

which  could  thus  be  commuted  at  will  without  altering  the 
result.  Accordingly  we  must  be  careful  to  distinguish1  be- 
tween LJL2  A  and  LyLl  A. 

Once  more;  some  relations  when  inverted  yield  a  definite 
result,  others  yield  an  indefinite  result,  and  thus  are  in  more 
agreement  with  our  ordinary  logical  formulae.  That  is, 
L~1LA  may  =  A  simply,  or  it  may  have  A  as  one  only  out  of 
a  possibly  infinite  number  of  solutions.  Thus  if  A  be  the 
husband  of  B,  (in  a  monogamous  country)  B  must  be  the 
person  of  whom  A  is  the  husband;  elsewhere  she  may  only  be 
one  of  a  number  of  women  who  will  all  equally  answer  the 
description. 

It  is  this  immensely  extensive  signification  of  the  word 
relation,  and  the  consequent  variety  of  symbolic  procedure 
which  is  called  for  if  we  attempt  to  treat  it  symbolically, 
which  seem  to  me  to  render  it  hopeless  to  establish  any- 
thing in  the  least  deserving  the  name  of  a  Logic  of  Relatives. 
The  attempt  however  to  introduce  relative  terms  into  Logic 
was  made  by  some  of  the  first  who  employed  symbolic 
notation.  Lambert  indeed  has  treated  these  questions  more 
fully  perhaps  than  any  one  since  his  time : — I  cannot  but 
think  that  his  attempt  to  introduce  them  into  his  system  was 
one  of  the  principal  causes  of  his  failure  to  work  it  out  more 
completely  and  successfully  than  he  did.  He  expressly  dis- 
cusses the  question  whether  powers  are  to  be  admitted  in 

1  The  earliest  definite  notice  that  remarks  that  WBDS  is  by  no  means 

I  have  seen  of  the  fact  that,  in  cer-  the  same  as  WDBS,  on  the  ground 

tain    canes,    the    commutative   law  that  the  position  of  a  term  is  often 

must  be  rejected,  is  in  Semler  ( Ver-  an  index  of  the  relative  importance 

such  ilber  die  combinatorlsche   Me-  to  be  attached  to  the  attributes  re- 

tliode,  1811),  but  it  is  scarcely  more  ferred  to.     Semler,  it   may  be    re- 

than  a   pasHing   statement.     Thus,  marked,   was  acquainted    with    the 

putting  H  for  bequem,  D  for  dauer-  works  of  Lambert  and  Ploucquet. 
haft,  W  for  wohlfeil,  S  "or  tchon,  he 


xix.]  Variations  in  symbolic  procedure.  403 

symbolic  notation,  and  decides  that  they  are  ;  as  indeed  was 
unavoidable  in  such  a  wide  extent  of  signification  as  must 
then  be  accepted.  Thus  in  his  Architectonic  (i,  82)  where 
he  has  discussed  this  question  more  fully  than  elsewhere, 
he  expressly  includes  such  various  relations  as  'cause  and 
effect,  means,  intention,  ground,  species  and  genus'.  Thus 
7  representing  a  genus  of  A  we  have  the  result  ay ;  a  higher 
genus  of  this  will  be  indicated  by  arf,  and  so  on.  Similarly 
with  the  relation  of  species. 

As  I  have  already  intimated,  the  attempt  to  construct 
a  Logic  of  Relatives  seems  to  me  altogether  hopeless  owing 
to  the  extreme  vagueness  and  generality  of  this  conception  of 
a  Relation.  Almost  anything  may  be  regarded  as  a  relation, 
and  when  we  attempt  to  group  them  into  manageable  portions 
we  find  that  several  distinct  codes  of  laws  are  required. 
Even  in  one  of  the  simplest  possible  kinds  of  relation  we 
find  that  the  inverse  processes  may  be  quite  insoluble. 
Given  the  relation  of  A  to  C,  and  of  B  to  G,  it  might  be 
assumed  that  that  of  A  to  B  was  determinable.  But  a 
moment's  consideration  shows  that  this  is  not  so.  If  the 
distance  (to  take  one  of  the  simplest  and  most  definite  of  all 
relations)  of  A  and  of  B  from  C  is  exactly  a  mile,  that  of  A 
from  B,  (the  relation  desired),  may  be  anything  not  exceed- 
ing two  miles :  a  similar  result  holds  if  that  distance  be 
anything  under  one  mile.  But  if  the  'relation'  were  that  the 
distance  is  not  less  than  a  mile  in  each  case,  the  resultant 
distance  of  A  from  B  might  be  absolutely  anything  whatever. 

What  therefore  a  Logic  of  Relatives  has  to  do  is  to  make 
a  selection  out  of  an  altogether  infinite  field,  confining  itself  to 
those  relations  only  which  obey  certain  definite  symbolic 
laws.  Mr  Murphy,  for  instance,  following  some  suggestions 
by  De  Morgan  (Camb.  Phil.  Trans.  X,  336),  has  proposed  a 
scheme  of  the  following  kind  : — "Relations  (indicated  by  the 

26—2 


404  Variations  in  symbolic  procedure.     [CHAP.  xix. 

symbol  L)  may  be  divided  into  those  which  are  '  transitive' 
and  those  which  are  '  intransitive',  i.e.  according  as  L*  is  or  is 
not  equal  to  L.  They  are  also  invertible  or  uninvertible,  that 
is  to  say,  L'1  is  or  is  not  equal  to  L.  There  are  thus  four 
classes,  i.e. 

1.  Transitive  and  invertible. 

2.  Transitive  but  uninvertible. 

3.  Intransitive  but  invertible. 

4.  Intransitive  and  uninvertible. 

To  the  first  belong  equality,  brotherhood,  and  various  other 
relations.  To  the  second  inclusion,  causation,  sequence, 
greater  magnitude,  &c.  To  the  third  exclusion,  difference, 
&c.  To  the  fourth  the  great  majority  of  relations. 

I  certainly  think  that  this  scheme  is  sound  as  a  classifica- 
tion. But  for  the  purposes  of  a  logical  system  it  does  not 
seem  to  me  that  it  would  add  any  large  domain  to  our  pro- 
vince. The  two  last  classes  indeed  are  surely  unworkable  in 
anything  which  can  be  called  a  logical  system ;  for,  involving 
powers,  they  would  in  all  but  the  simplest  cases  lead  to 
quadratic  or  higher  equations. 

(The  reader  who  wishes  to  study  the  little  that  has  yet 
been  done  on  this  subject  may  consult  the  following  notices 
and  papers : — 

Ellis  L.  Mathematical  and  other  writings,  p.  391.  (Also 
published  by  Mr  Harley  in  the  Report  of  the  Brit.  Ass.,  1870.) 

De  Morgan.     Syllabus  of  Logic. 

Trans,  of  Gamb.  Phil.  Soc.  Vol.  X.  (In  my 
opinion  one  of  the  fullest  and  best  papers  yet  produced  on 
the  subject.) 

Peirce  C.  S.    American  Acad.  of  Arts  and  Sciences.  Vol.  IX. 

Macfarlane  A.     Proc.  of  R.  Soc.  Edinburgh,  1879. 

Murphy  J.  J.     Belfast  Nat.  Hist,  and  Phil.  Soc.,  1875. 

•  Manchester  Lit.  and  Phil.  Soc.t  Vol.  vn. 

(1880);  do.  Feb.  1881.) 


CHAPTER  XX. 

HISTORIC  NOTES. 

I.  On  the  various  notations  adopted  for  expressing  the 
common  propositions  of  Logic. 

Attention  has  been  already  called  to  the  general  fact 
of  the  perplexing  variety  of  symbolic  forms  which  have 
been  proposed  from  time  to  time  by  various  writers,  but 
probably  few  persons  have  any  adequate  conception  of  the 
extent  to  which  this  license  of  invention  has  been  carried. 
I  have  therefore  thought  it  well  to  put  together  into  one  list 
the  principal  forms,  so  far  as  I  have  observed  them,  in 
which  one  and  the  same  proposition  has 'thus  been  expressed1. 
For  this  purpose  the  Universal  Negative  has  been  selected, 
as  being  about  the  simplest  and  least  ambiguous  of  all  forms 
of  statement.  This  arrangement  has  not  been  drawn  up  with 
a  mere  wish  to  make  a  collection.  Most  of  these  forms,  it 

1  The  reader  will,  of  course,  un-  ent  points  of  view  that  have  been 

derstand  that  I  am  not   attempting  adopted.    It  is  not  to  be  supposed 

to  give  an  account  of  the  schemes  of  that  each  author  has  only  made  use 

the  various  authors  referred  to,  but-  of  the  notation  here  assigned  to  him. 
merely  indicating  the  principal  differ- 


406  Historic  notes.  [CHAP. 

must  be  remembered,  have  been  made  the  instruments  of  a 
more  or  less  systematic  exposition  of  the  subject.  In  so 
far,  therefore,  as  the  notation  is  not  entirely  arbitrary — which 
it  is  in  very  few  instances — we  shall  find  it  instructive  to 
compare  the  different  aspects  of  the  same  operation  to  which 
they  respectively  direct  attention.  For  convenience  of  re- 
ference and  comparison  they  are  expressed  in  the  same 
letters  in  each  case,  S  and  P  standing  respectively  for  the 
subject  and  predicate  of  the  original  proposition ;  viz.  no  S 
is  P. 

The   analysis  by  which   I   should  reach   these   various 
forms  would  be  somewhat  of  the  following  kind : 

I.  In  the  first  place   we   may  regard  the   proposition 
as  an  existential  one.     In  this  case  what  it  does  is  to  deny 
the  existence  of  the  class  of  things  which  are  both  S  and  P. 

II.  We  may  cast  the  proposition  into  the  form  of  an 
identity.   What  we  then  do  is  to  make  the  terms  of  the  propo- 
sition respectively  S  and  not-P,  and  to  identify  the  former 
with  an  undetermined  part  of  the  latter.     The  appropriate 
copula  is  then  of  course  (=). 

III.  Another  plan  is  to  regard  the  proposition  as  ex- 
pressing a  consequence  or  implication :  '  If  S  then  not-P',  or, 
'  the  presence  of  S  implies  the  absence  of  P'.     This  relation, 
of  course,  is  not  convertible,  for  it  does  not  follow  that  the 
absence  of  P  implies  the  presence  of  S.    Accordingly,  some 
kind  of  unsymmetrical  symbol  becomes  appropriate  to  repre- 
sent the  copula  in  this  case. 

IV.  Again,  keeping  more  closely  to  the  common   ex- 
pression of  the  proposition,  we  may  regard  it  as  expressing 
a  relation  not,  as  above,  between  S  and  not-P,  but  between 
S   and    P.     This  relation    is    convertible,  and    we    should 
therefore  naturally  seek  in  this  case  for  some  symmetrical 
symbol. 


XX.] 


'Historic  notes. 


V.  Again,  we  may  couch  the  proposition  in  concep- 
tualist  or  notional  phraseology,  regarding  S  and  P  not  as 
classes  of  things  but  as  attributes  or  groups  of  attributes. 

YI.  Lastly,  we  may  meet  with  nondescript  attempts 
which  aim  at  little  more  than  translating  the  proposition 
as  it  stands,  or  adopting  some  arbitrary  notation  for  it. 

Grouping  them  thus,  we  may  arrange  our  species  as 
follows : — 


I.     Existential 

f  1    SP=Q 
.  2     8(0=P) 

Boole. 
Macfarlane. 

'  3.     S=v(l-P) 

Boole. 

4.     S=$(I-P) 

Boole. 

5.     S=v(X-P) 

Wundt. 

6,     S=Sp 

Jevons. 

II.     Identity 

7.    S=l-P-y. 

Delboeuf,  Murphy. 

s      v    P 

0.       O=  — 

Holland. 

oo 

9.     S<X-P 

Drobisch. 

.10.     S<-P 

Segner. 

rll.     +S-P 

Darjes. 

12.     SiP. 

Grassmann. 

III.     Implication 
(non-convertible) 

13.     S  :  P 
14.     S—  <P 

MaccolL 
Peirce. 

I                    P 

Frege. 

15    '           • 
15'       1  ^ 

:16.     8.P 

De  Morgan. 

17.    ^)(P 

Wundt 

IV.     Common  Form 

18.     S>P 

Ploucquet 

(convertible) 

19.    ^  ||  «P 

Bentham. 

20.    6'  :  •        | 

—  :  P  Hamilton. 

r21.     L-S&P 

Leibnitz. 

L  ^ 

Lambert. 

V.    Notional 


m      n 


23. 


VI.  Nondescript,  and  1 24.     Sx=  -  P 
Arbitrary         (25.    nS-P 


Lambert. 

Maimon. 
Ploucquet. 


408  Historic  note&.  [CHAP. 

As  most  of  these  forms  are  marked  off  from  each  other 
by  more  or  less  distinct  specific  differences,  it  will  be  well  to 
.  go  a  little  into  detail  in  describing  them. 

1.  This  will  be  perfectly  familiar  to   the   reader.     It 
simply  indicates  the  destruction  of  the  class  SP,  or  the  empti- 
ness of  the  corresponding  compartment.    I  prefer  it  myself  as 
a  primary  statement  of  such  a  proposition. 

2.  The  characteristic  of  Mr  Macfarlane's  notation  here 
lies  in  the  attempt  to  mark  the  limits  of  the  '  universe '.    He 
considers  that  the  subject  of  the  proposition  marks  the  limits 
of  the  implied  universe.    "  Every  general  proposition  refers  to 
a  definite  universe;  which  is  the  subject  of  the  judgment,  and, 
it  may  be,  of  a  series  of  judgments.     For  example,  'all  men 
are  mortal*  refers  to  the   universe  'men'.     'No  men  are 
perfect'  refers  to  the  same  universe"  (Algebra  of  Logic,  p. 
29).    Hence  his  symbolic  form  is  read  off,  Within  the  uni- 
verse of  S  there  is  no  such  thing  as  a  P.     I  have  already 
(Chap.  viil.  p.  185)  given  my  reasons  for  dissenting  from  such 
an  assumption  as  to  the  nature  of  this  universe.     In  any 
case  it  seems  to  me  arbitrary  to  seek  its  limits  in  the  subject 
of  the  negative  proposition. 

3 — 6.  These  four  forms  are  to  all  intents  and  purposes 
identical.  The  only  distinction  between  them  is  that  (3) 
introduces  an  arbitrary  sign  (v)  to  express  the  indeterminate- 
ness  of  the  selection  to  be  made  from  not-P;  that  (4)  employs 
a  well-known  mathematical  symbol  to  express  the  same  idea; 
whilst  (6)  disguises  this  indeterminateness  by  describing  S 
as  the  $-part  of  what  is  not  P  instead  of  directly  reminding 
us  that  it  is  an  unknown  part.  It  also  abbreviates  by  sub- 
stituting a  single  letter  p  for  the  fuller  equivalent  1  —  P. 
No.  (5)  is  employed  by  Wundt  (Logik,  1880)  in  his  account 
of  symbolic  procedure.  It  only  differs  from  the  third  and 
fourth  by  making  use  of  X  as  the  universe-symbol,  instead  of 


xx.]  Historic  notes.  409 

unity.  As  regards  the  representation  of  the  class  not-P  by  p, 
in  (6),  there  is  one  serious  defect.  We  cannot  thus  represent 
the  negation  of  a  composite  class.  The  other  schemes  meet 
the  difficulty.  "  What  is  not  both  B  and  C "  can  be  readily 
represented  by  I—BC,  and  "what  is  neither  B  nor  C" 
by  (1  —  B)  (1  —  C) ;  and  the  similar  devices  of  a  bar  over  two 
or  more  letters,  or  an  accent  put  outside  a  bracket  which 
contains  them  (as  in  specimens  12  and  13)  will  subserve  the 
same  purpose.  But  on  the  plan  of  employing  small  letters 
to  mark  negations,  ab  would  stand  for  "  What  is  neither  A 
nor  B",  and  there  seems  no  ready  mode  of  simply  expressing 
the  negation  of  AB  as  a  whole.  We  have  to  break  it  up  into 
detail  and  write  it  a  +  Ab,  or  in  some  equivalent  form.  This 
is  a  serious  symbolic  blemish. 

7.  This  form  is  employed  by  Prof.  Delboeuf  (Logique 
Algoriihmique,  1877),  and  seems  to  me  identical  with  one 
proposed  by  Mr  J.  J.  Murphy  (Relation  of  Logic  to  Language, 
1875;  Mind,  V.  52).     It  only  differs  from  the  preceding  forms 
by  adopting  the   subtractive   instead  of  the  multiplicative 
symbol.     Whereas  those  four   say,  Make  an  indeterminate 
selection  from  not-P  and  we  obtain  JS;  this  says,  Make  an 
indeterminate   rejection  by  omission,  and   we  obtain  S.     It 
is  not  incorrect,  but  seems  to  me  to  suffer  from  the  drawback 
of  demanding  a  tacit  condition,  viz.  that  y  shall  be  included 
in  1  —  P.     When  this  condition  is  clearly  expressed,  it  coin- 
cides  with  Boole's  form    (If  B   is   included   in  A,  so  that 
B  =  vA,  then  A  —  B  =  (1  —  v) A :  but,  1  —  v  having  the  same 
limits  of  uncertainty  as  v,  this  may  be   written  vA],  and 
becomes  exactly  equivalent  to  8  =  v  (1  —  P).     It  should  be 
remarked  that  Delboeuf  divides  this  general  form  into  several 
distinct  cases  according  to  the  extent  of  the  whole  universe 
covered  by  S  and  not-P,  and  so  forth  (Log.  Alg.  p.  58). 

8.  This  was  a  scheme  proposed  by  Holland,  a  friend  and 


410  Historic  notes.  [CHAP. 

correspondent  of  J.  H.  Lambert.  Though  not  sound  in  this 
particular  application  it  deserves  notice,  both  for  its  ingenuity, 
and  historically  as  an  anticipation  of  some  more  modern  results. 
(It  is  given  in  Lambert's  Deutscher  gelehrter  Briefwechsel, 
I.  17.)  The  general  prepositional  form  which  he  proposed 

Q        -p 

was  —  =  — ,  which  is  really  nothing  else  than  Boole's  vS  =  v'P, 

with  the  difference  that  the  arbitrary  factor  is  put  into  the 
denominator  instead  of  the  numerator  (i.e.  the  factor  multi- 
plies by  -  and  — ,  it  does  not  divide  by  p  and  TT;  there  is 

P  7T 

no  notion  here  of  an  inverse  logical  operation,  though  Holland 
had  realized  it  elsewhere).  The  consequent  condition  as  to 
the  range  of  value  of  p  and  IT  is  of  course  that  they  must 
lie  between  1  and  oo,  just  as  in  Boole's  form  v  and  vr  lie 
between  1  and  0.  What  we  express  symbolically  therefore 
is  '  some  S  is  some  P\  where  '  some '  may  range  from  none  to 
all.  So  far  good.  Where  he  goes  astray,  as  already  noticed 
in  Ch.  VIL,  is  by  interpreting  the  limiting  case  S  =  OP  (viz. 
when p  =  1,  7r=  oo)  as  meaning  "all  S  is  no  P",  instead  of 
"  all  S  is  nothing".  The  fact  is  that  his  form  is  extensible 
enough  to  cover  particular  and  universal  affirmatives,  with 
distributed  and  undistributed  predicates  ;  but  in  order  to  make 
it  stretch  so  as  to  cover  negative  propositions  we  must  either 
use  a  negative  predicate,  not-P,  or  else  join  S  and  P  together 
into  one  complex  subject  and  equate  this  to  0  as  in  (1). 

All  of  these  six  concur  in  employing  the  equation  symbol 
(=),  aud  rightly  so,  for  what  they  represent  is  the  identity 
of  the  subject  S  with  a  portion  of  not-P.  The  two  following 
must  really  be  considered  to  belong  to  the  same  general  class, 
though  actually  employing  a  different,  and  decidedly  less 
suitable  symbol,  viz.  (<). 

9.     This  was  employed  by  Drobisch  in  the  first  edition  of 


xx.]  Historic  notes.  411 

his  Neue  Darstellung  der  Logik  (1836),  but  is  omitted  in  later 
editions.  Two  points  deserve  notice  about  it.  First  as  regards 
the  connecting  symbol  itself.  We  are  familiar  with  it  in 
mathematics  as  meaning  'less  than';  and  it  is  here  trans- 
ferred to  the  signification  'is  included  in',  or  'is  identical 
with  a  part  of.  It  is  therefore  exactly  equivalent  to  the 
equation  symbol  when,  as  in  the  last  examples,  this  is  affixed 
to  a  predicate  affected  by  some  indeterminate  factor.  This 
transfer  of  the  sign  <  does  not  seem  to  me  a  very  convenient 
or  accurate  one,  though  its  signification  is  quite  clear1 ;  it 
need  hardly  be  remarked  that  it  here  refers  to  the  extent  not 
the  intent  of  the  terms  8  and  P.  Secondly,  as  regards  the 
predicate,  the  notation  is  curious  as  shewing  the  great  diffi- 
culty which  logicians  brought  up  in  the  old  traditions  had  in 
realizing  the  conception  of  a  '  universe'  which  could  be  repre- 
sented by  a  single  symbol.  The  letter  X  does  not  here  stand 
for  really  "all",  for  this  would  be  to  introduce  an  "unend- 
licher  Begriff",  or  "infinite  term",  quite  alien  to  old  tradition. 
Drobisch  only  ventures  symbolically  to  embrace  a  finite  but 
uncertain  portion  of  this  infinite  universe.  Let  us  then  take  a 
class  term  X  of  uncertain  extent,  only  demanding  that  its 
extent  shall  be  greater  than  those  of  8  and  P  together, 
and  we  may  regard  this  as  finite,  and  therefore  suitable  to 
logical  treatment.  When  our  negative  predicate,  not-P,  is 

1  Lambert,  who  was  perhaps  the  t ion  of  this  notation  (if  indeed  it  may 

first  to  employ  this  sign  for  this  not  be  called  something  more  than  a 

purpose  in  Logic,  (as  presently  point-  suggestion)  in  a  short  logical  paper, 

ed  out,  he  employed  it  intensively)  consisting  of  heads  of  theses,  by 

takes  its  propriety  for  granted :  "Die  James  Bernoulli,  in  1685  (Opera  i. 

Zeichnung  A>B  scheint  ganz  natiir-  214).  My  attention  was  called  to 

lich  zu  bedeuten  der  Begriff  A  ent-  this  paper  by  a  reference  in  De 

halte  ausser  den  Merkmalen  des  B  Morgan's  articles  in  the  Camb.  Phil. 

noch  mehrere"  (Briefweschel  I.  10).  Transactions.  Hoffbauer  (Analytik 

There  is  a  much  earlier  sugges-  der  Urtheik)  has  used  the  same  sign. 


412  Historic  notes.  [CHAP. 

thus  brought  down  to  finite  extent  in  the  form  of  X—  P,  we 
can  venture  to  refer  $  to  it.  We  imply,  in  fact,  that  S  is  a 
portion  of  not-P ;  and  we  write  it  not  by  an  express  equation 
formula,  but  by  an  inclusion  formula,  as  S  <  X—  P. 

10.  This  is  of  considerable  interest  historically,  since 
Segner's  Specimen  Logicce  (1740),  is  the  first  systematic 
attempt,  so  far  as  I  have  seen,  to  construct  a  symbolic  Logic. 
(He  had  nothing  before  him  of  this  kind  to  appeal  to  beyond 
a  few  ingenious  suggestions  by  Leibnitz.)  The  sign  <  is 
used  in  the  same  sense  as  by  Drobisch,  A  <  B  marking 
that  the  extent  of  B  is  inclusive  of  that  of  A.  But  in  one 
respect  he  seems  to  me  distinctly  in  advance  of  Drobisch, 
and  very  much  in  advance  of  his  time.  This  is  in  his  free  use 
of  negative  terms  in  their  full  extent  (he  preserves  the  old 
name  of  'infinite'  for  them),  for  the  representation  of  which 
he  uses  the  negative  sign.  Thus  if  A  stands  for  man,  —  A 
stands  for  not-man.  It  may  be  added  that  he  had  fully 
realized  the  fact  that  it  is  symbolically  indifferent  whether  we 
apply  A  to  a  positive  or  to  its  contradictory,  provided  we 
preserve  the  antithesis  between  +  and  — .  Thus  if  A  stands 
for  non-triangulum,  —A  will  stand  for  triangulum,  and  so 
forth.  Hence  his  expression  S  <  —  P  marks  quite  correctly 
that  S  is  extensively  a  portion  of  not- P. 

This  notation  of  course  is  very  crude,  being  not  of  much 
value  even  within  the  limits  of  the  syllogism.  The  various 
syllogistic  moods  are  however  worked  through  with  its  aid, 
but  with  certain  departures  from  the  common  view  which 
need  not  here  be  described.  It  may  interest  the  historical 
student  of  this  part  of  the  subject  to  say  that  Segner  not 
only  describes  the  symbolic  procedure  by  which  from  two 
such  premises  as  A  <  B,  C  <  D,  we  can  infer  AC  <  BD ;  but 
also  expressly  calls  attention  to  the  "law  of  duality"  as  it  is 
sometimes  termed,  viz.  that  A  A  =A  ;  that  is,  he  points  out 


xx.]  Historic  notes.  413 

that  when  A  and  C  are  the  same  no  change  is  produced : — 
"subject!  enim  idea,  cum  se  ipsa  composita,  novam  ideam  pro- 
ducere  nequit".  There  are  many  other  interesting  points 
about  the  work  which  must  be  passed  over  here. 

We  now  come  to  a  group  of  forms  which  I  have  thrown 
together  as  adopting  somewhat  of  an  implication  arrange- 
ment :  some  of  them  indeed  expressly  describe  themselves 
as  indicating  an  implication.  Thus, 

11.  The  scheme  of  Darjes  will  be  found  in  his  Weg  zur 
Wahrheit  (1776).  His  expression  for  the  proposition  in 
question  is  best  put  into  words  as,  "posit  S,  and  we  sublate  P". 
It  turns  entirely  upon  the  representation  of  contradictories 
by  +  and  — ,  a  representation  which,  as  in  the  closely 
analogous  case  just  discussed,  will  do  fairly  well  up  to  a 
certain  point.  If  we  only  want  to  deal  with  pairs  of  con- 
tradictories, whether  terms  or  propositions,  and  only  want,  as 
above  remarked,  to  posit  and  sublate  them,  the  signs  +  and 
—  are  convenient.  But  then  we  lose  the  use  of  these  signs 
for  far  more  appropriate  purposes,  viz.  for  logical  aggregation 
and  exception.  Moreover  the  antithesis-  thus  suggested  of  a 
contradictory,  rather  than  a  supplementary  relation  between 
8  and  not-$,  soon  leads  to  difficulties.  How  are  we  to 
represent  not-£.not-P?  By  (-S-P)  or  by  (-S)x(-P)? 
There  is  no  convenient  opening  here  for  compounding  terms 
or  premises. 

The  only  brief  and  convenient  rule  for  working  this  nota- 
tion seems  to  apply  to  the  process  of  conversion.  From  '  Posit 
S  and  sublate  P',  we  deduce  of  course  'Posit  P  and  sublate 
S'.  Generalizing  this  to  cover  the  four  possible  cases  we  see 
that  it  may  be  summed  up  in  the  words  '  change  the  order  of 
the  terms  and  both  the  signs':  i.e.  from  (+S  +  P)  we  infer 
(—  P  —  S),  and  so  on. 

Though  therefore  the  scheme  of  employing  +  and  —  in 


414  Historic  notes.  [CHAP. 

Logic,  for  this  purpose,  repeatedly  presents  itself,  it  does  not 
seem  to  me  to  merit  any  more  detailed  investigation. 

12 — 14.  These  are,  to  my  thinking,  precisely  equivalent 
to  one  another.  It  is  true  that  Mr  Maccoll  insists  upon  it 
that  his  interpretation  of  his  class  symbols  as  standing  for 
statements,  marks  a  '  cardinal  point '  of  distinction ;  but  I 
regard  this  as  an  arbitrary  restriction  of  the  full  generality  of 
our  symbolic  language.  Phrase  it  how  we  will, — the  presence 
of  S  implies  that  of  P,  the  existence  of  S  implies  that  of  P, 
the  truth  of  S  implies  that  of  P,  and  so  forth  ; — the  antithesis 
at  bottom  is  always  the  same,  or  rather  it  comes  under  one 
generalized  signification. 

It  may  be  added,  in  explanation  of  the  differences  of 
detail,  that  the  line  over  a  letter,  and  the  accent,  respectively 
mark  contradiction ;  and  the  three  copula-symbols  may  in 
each  case  alike  be  read  '  implies'.  We  may  read  them  there- 
fore, '  S  marks,  or  implies,  the  absence  of  P  or  the  contradic- 
tion of  P,  as  the  case  may  be'.  The  converse  of  course 
does  not  hold ;  that  is,  not-P  does  not  imply  8.  If  this 
additional  information  were  given  to  us  we  should  in  each 
case  employ  the  copula  (=),  and  write  them  S=Pr,  8  =  P. 
The  sign  of  equality  marks  in  fact  the  double  implication, 
just  as  'All  8  is  all  P'  contains  the  two  propositions,  'All  S 
is  P\  and  'All  P  is  S'. 

Of  course,  in  saying  this,  it  must  not  for  a  moment  be 
supposed  that  the  various  systems  which  make  use  of  these 
notations  are  themselves  coincident.  On  the  contrary,  there 
are  various  differences,  both  in  the  detailed  treatment  and  in 
the  rest  of  the  notation,  even  between  (12)  and  (13);  whilst 
Prof.  Peirce  has  made  his  symbols  a  means  of  attacking 
various  problems  (such  as  the  Logic  of  Relatives)  which  have 
not  seemed  to  me  to  lie  across  the  path  we  have  had  to  take. 

(For  Grassmann's  scheme,  see  his  Begriffslehre,  1872 ;  for 


xx.]  Historic  notes.  415 

that  of  Mr  Maccoll,  the  Proc.  Lond.  Math.  Soc.,  1877;  and  for 
that  of  Prof.  Peirce,  the  American  Journal  of  Math.,  Vol.  ill.) 

15.  Frege's  scheme  (Begriffsschrift,  1879)  deserves  almost 
as  much  to  be  called  diagrammatic  as  symbolic.  It  is  one  of 
those  instances  of  an  ingenious  man  working  out  a  scheme, — 
in  this  case  a  very  cumbrous  one, — in  entire  ignorance  that 
anything  of  the  kind  had  ever  been  achieved  before.  A  word 
or  two  only  of  explanation  can  be  devoted  to  it  here.  A  hori- 
zontal dash  with  a  short  vertical  stroke  at  the  end  signifies  a 
proposition.  The  line  S  running  into  P  means  that  P  is 
dependent  upon  S; — this  is  in  fact  his  sign  of  dependence 
or  implication.  The  little  stroke  under  the  P-line  marks 
negation.  So  that  the  whole  arrangement  stands  for  'If  8 
then  not  P '.  We  can  proceed  in  this  way  to  build  up  more 
complicated  dependencies.  For  instance,  by  joining  this 
whole  arrangement  on  to  another  such  line,  we  can  represent 
the  compound  dependency  '  The  fact  that  S  implies  the 
absence  of  P,  implies  Q',  and  so  on.  One  obvious  defect  in 
this  scheme  is  the  inordinate  amount  of  space  demanded  by 
it ;  nearly  half  a  page  is  sometimes  demanded  for  an  implica- 
tion which  any  reasonable  scheme  would  compress  into  half 
a  line. 

The  members  of  the  group  now  before  us,  expressing  a 
relation  between  S  and  not-P,  are  essentially  non-convertible, 
and  therefore  appropriately  employ  non-symmetrical  symbols 
for  the  copula1.  In  this  respect  they  depart  somewhat  from 
tradition  and  each  is  the  scheme  of  a  logical  innovator.  The 
next  group  keeps  closer  to  old  custom,  in  respect  that  its 
members  express  directly  a  relation  between  S  and  P,  and 
therefore  call  for  a  symmetrical  copula-symbol. 

1  No.  (13)  is  of  course  non-  mathematics,  as  also  here  in  Logic, 
symmetrical  in  regard  to  the  recog-  though  this  symbol  is  symmetrical 
nized  signification  of  the  sign  (-.)  in  in  actual  form. 


416  Historic  notes.  [CHAP, 

16 — 18.  These  three  of  course  employ  purely  arbitrary 
symbols,  and  are  meant  to  do  so,  the  symbols  being  mere 
substitutes  for  the  copula  of  ordinary  Logic.  Wundt's  symbol 
is  one  of  a  group  (Logik,  p.  244)  some  of  which  mark  recip- 
rocal relations  between  the  terms,  and  some  non-reciprocal, 
and  its  symmetrical  form  is  meant  to  shew  that  it  belongs  to 
the  former  class.  Thus  S  =  P  marks  identity ;  S  >  P  super- 
ordination  of  S  to  P ;  S  z.  P  subordination  of  S  to  P,  and 
SQP  the  intersection  of  8  and  P.  These,  with  S)(P,  make 
up  the  five  possible  distinct  forms  of  class  relations.  To  these 
however  Wundt  adds  some  others  which  are  not  so  much 
class  relations  as  dependencies  or  implications.  De  Morgan, 
I  suspect,  had  not  this  distinction  between  symmetrical  and 
unsymmetrical  forms  clearly  in  view.  His  notation  here  is 
that  which  he  adopted  in  his  Formal  Logic ;  he  changed  it 
subsequently  in  his  papers  in  the  Camb.  Phil.  Transactions. 

As  regards  Ploucquet's  expression,  this  is  mainly  employed 
in  the  more  symbolical  parts  of  his  logical  treatises  (e.g.  his 
Methodus  Calculandi,  1763).  He  there  uses  only  two  signs; 
one,  an  arbitrary  and  somewhat  misleading  sign  for  negation, 
(>);  and  one  for  affirmation  (juxtaposition  of  the  letters). 
The  predicate  is  always  distributed,  the  whole  and  part  of  it 
being  indicated  by  large  and  small  letters  respectively.  Thus 
'All  A  is  B'  stands,  Ab,  viz.  'All  A  is  some  £'.  'No  A  is  C" 
stands  A  >  C,  viz.  '  No  A  is  any  C'.  The  processes  of  reason- 
ing are  then  resolved  into  substitution  of  identities  and  recog- 
nition of  non-identities.  It  may  be  remarked  that  had 
Ploucquet  broken  sufficiently  with  the  past  to  make  a  free 
use  of  negative,  or  infinite  predicates,  he  might  have  adopted 
another  form  for  these  negative  propositions.  It  is  true  that 
he  does  occasionally  employ  such  predicates,  but  not  suffi- 
ciently often  to  have  devoted  a  special  symbol  to  them.  Had 
he  written,  for  instance,  P  for  '  all  not-P',  and  p  for  '  some 


xx.]  Historic  notes.  417 

not-P',  his  expression  for  'No  S  is  P'  might  have  been  Sp, 
viz.  'All  S  is  some  not-P',  in  better  accordance  with  the 
familiar  symbolic  view  at  the  present  time,  and  as  illustrated 
in  group  (II.). 

19,  20.  These  two  must  be  regarded  as  precisely  equi- 
valent, with  one  exception  to  be  presently  noticed.  They  are 
both  founded  upon  the  doctrine  of  the  Quantification  of  the 
Predicate,  and  are  meant  to  call  attention  to  that  character- 
istic. They  may  be  translated  as  saying  '  the  whole  of  S  is 
distinct  from  the  whole  of  P'.  Mr  Bentham's  t  means  total- 
ity, like  Hamilton's  (;),  and  the  parallel  lines  of  the  one  bear 
the  same  signification  as  the  crossed  wedge  of  the  other,  viz. 
'  distinct  from',  or  as  Hamilton  sometimes  puts  it,  not  '  con- 
gruent' with.  The  differential  characteristic  of  Hamilton's 
symbol  lies  in  the  distinction  between  the  thick  and  thin 
ends  of  the  wedge,  which  is  meant  to  mark  whether  the  pro- 
position is  read  in  extension  or  in  intension.  This  attempt 
to  compress  both  these  interpretations  into  one  form  is  now, 
I  presume,  generally  regarded  as  a  mistake.  (See  Hamilton's 
Logic,  it.  p.  473;  Bentham's  Logic,  p.  134.) 

We  now  turn  to  a  group  the  interpretation  of  which  is 
necessarily  one  of  intension,  that  is,  in  which  the  letters  stand 
for  notions  or  attributes  and  not  for  classes. 

21.  Leibnitz's  formula  is  given  in  his  Specimen  demon- 
strandi  (Erdmann,  p.  96).  It  is  not  definitely  assigned  as  a 
symbolic  expression  of  the  proposition;  and  like  some  other 
of  the  logical  speculations  in  his  shorter  works  seems  indeed 
to  have  been  thrown  out  as  little  more  than  a  hint.  His  view 
is  this.  The  sign  (— )  is  the  sign  of  'detraction',  i.e.  abstrac- 
tion, or  the  withdrawal  of  an  attribute  from  a  notion ;  and 
(oo  )  is  the  sign  of  identity.  Now  let  L  and  P  be  two  notions 
which  have  something  in  common,  but  that  when  S  is  thrown 
out  of  the  former  the  remainder  is  P.  This  is  expressed  by 
v.  L.  27 


4-18  Historic  notes.  [CHAP. 

L—S<xP,  and  implies  that  S  and  P  are  distinct  notions,  or 
that  No  S  is  P.  His  own  account  of  the  matter  (I  have 
changed  some  of  the  letters)  is  this.  "Sit  L  —  SaoP. 
Dico  S  et  P  nihil  habere  commune.  Nam  ex  definitione 
detracti  et  residui  omnia  quse  sunt  in  L  manent  in  P  prseter 
ea  quae  sunt  in  S,  quorum  nihil  manet  in  P":  so  that  no 
Sis  P. 

This  particular  suggestion  is  very  brief,  and  seems  to  me 
decidedly  obscure,  but  it  deserves  mention,  both  historically 
and  as  having  possibly  given  occasion  to  the  similar  but  much 
more  complete  suggestions  of  Lambert.  I  proceed  to  their 
discussion. 

22.  This  scheme  proposed  by  Lambert  might  at  first 
sight  be  considered  identical  with  that  of  Holland  (No.  8),  or 
rather  with  the  general  prepositional  form  of  which  that  is  a 
particular  case ;  for  the  two  expressions  are  formally  the  same. 
In  reality,  however,  they  are  in  striking  contrast  with  each 
other.  With  Holland,  the  letters  p  and  TT,  in  the  denomina- 
tors, really  stood  for  numerical  factors.  What  he  meant  to 
signify  was  that  '  some  portion  of  the  extent  (estimated  by 
1 -7-J9)  of  S,  is  identical  with  some  portion  (similarly  estimated 
by  1  -T-  TT)  of  that  of  P ' ;  though  he  blundered  when  he  came 
to  interpret  this  into  a  negative  proposition.  But  with 
Lambert,  m  and  n  have  a  better  right  to  stand  in  the  deno- 
minator. They  mark  attributes,  and  division  by  them  stands 
for  abstraction,  so  that  the  proposition  is  interpreted  here  not 
in  respect  of  extent  but  of  intent.  His  idea  is  this.  Though 
S  and  P  are  distinct  as  classes  they  must  have  some  attri- 
butes in  common ;  that  is,  they  must  both  belong  to  some 
higher  genus.  Abstract  then  certain  attributes  from  each, 
as  indicated  in  the  division  respectively  by  m  and  n,  and 
the  remaining  groups  of  attributes  will  coincide. 

This  is  quite  true,  and  highly  ingenious,  but  what  one 


xx.]  Historic  notes. 

does  not  see  is  how  this  symbolic  expression  becomes  a  fitting 
representative  of  the  universal  negative  proposition  rather 
than  of  any  other.  Whatever  the  relations  of  extent  of  two 
notions,  S  and  P,  it  will  always  hold  good  that  some  of  the 
attributes  in  one  are  different  from  some  of  those  in  the  other. 
This  points,  I  think,  to  an  essential  defect  in  the  attempt  to 
interpret  propositions  in  respect  of  the  intent  of  both  their 
subjects  and  predicates ;  it  gives  us,  for  instance,  no  means  of 
distinguishing  between  '  some  X  is  Y\  and  'some  X  is  not  Y', 
or  indeed  for  adequately  characterising  any  '  particular '  pro- 
position whatever. 

It  is  rather  curious  that  Segner,  whose  work  (see  above) 
Lambert  had  read,  could  have  set  him  right  here.  He  has 
expressly  discussed  almost  exactly  the  same  question,  and 
realized  its  logical  bearings  clearly,  though  he  did  not  reach 
the  very  important  symbolic  step  of  introducing  the  inverse 
or  division  sign  to  mark  it.  He  stated  this  theorem  :  Given 
that  two  classes  indicated  by  composite  terms,  AB  and  CD, 
have  something  in  common,  and  we  abstract  an  attribute  from 
each,  say  A  and  C,  then  the  resultant  classes,  B  and  D,  must 
also  have  something  in  common.  But  such  community  may 
be  of  any  one  of  four  kinds  which  he  marks  respectively  by 
B  =  D,  B  <D,  B>  D,  J9xD;  that  is,  coextension,  inclusion 
of  B  in  D,  inclusion  of  D  in  B,  and  intersection. 

23.  The  above  expression  will  be  found  described  in 
Lambert's  Deutscker  gelehrter  Briefwechsel,  I.  37 ;  and  in  the 
Nova  Act.  Erudit.  1765.  The  present  one  is  a  slight  modifi- 
cation of  it  given  in  his  Log.  Abhandhmgen,  I.  98.  The 
general  idea  is  exactly  the  same.  Abstract  sufficient  attri- 
butes from  P  until  only  those  are  left  which  are  common  to 
it  and  to  S.  This  does  not  yield  an  identity  as  before,  for  S 
is  now  more  determinate  than  P,  but  it  makes  the  remaining 
attributes  of  P  included  in  those  of  S.  Interpreted  therefore 

27—2 


420  Historic  notes.  [CHAP. 

p  m 

in  intension,  we  have  '  All  —  is  8',  and  this  we  express,  by 

m 

p 

use  of  the  sign  >,  in  the  form  S>  —  .     Another  equivalent 

772* 

form  given  by  Lambert,  and  which  the  reader  will  readily 
c 

interpret  for  himself,  is  —  <  P.    It  is  obvious  that  in  order  to 
m 

get  an  identity  of  subject  and  predicate,  instead  of  a  mere 
inclusion  of  one  by  the  other,  we  must  abstract  from  both  of 
them,  as  in  (22). 

24.  This  is  a  form  employed  by  S.  Maimon  (Versuch 
einer  neuen  Logik,  1794).     The  negative  sign  here  indicates, 
as  in  several  other  schemes,  the  contradictory  of  a  class,  so 
that  (—  P)  means  not-P.     The  term  x  is  intended  to  repre- 
sent an  arbitrary  logical  factor  or  determination.     Hence  the 
interpretation  is,  "  S,  howsoever  determined,  is  not-P  " ;  i.  e. 
by  no  kind  of  qualification  can  we  reduce  it  to  any  part  of  P. 
Of  course  the  qualification  here  can  only  be  in  the  way  of 
logical  determination:  not  abstraction,  as  in  the  two  preceding. 
There  are  a  variety  of  serious  defects  in  this  notation,  and  it 
represents  altogether  a  great  falling  off  from  some  of  its  pre- 
decessors, though  Maimon  has  contrived  with  more  or  less 
success  to  carry  it  through  all  the  syllogistic  moods.     One 
obvious  inaccuracy  is  to  be  seen  in  the  use  of  the  sign  ( =  ). 
We  have  no  right  to  adopt  the  equational  form  unless  the 
subject  and  predicate  are  identified,  which  they  are  not  in 
this  case,  the  former  being  a  part  only  of  the  latter. 

25.  Ploucquet  frequently  uses  this  form  in  some  of  his 
logical  writings  (e.g.  Fundamenta  Philosophies  speculative, 
17G4).     It  must  be  observed  that  the  sign  (  — )  here  stands 
for  affirmation,  or  rather  for  that  and  negation  indifferently, 
the  negation  being  put  into  the  subject,  where  N  stands  for 
nulluni.     It  is  therefore  merely  a  rendering  of  the  common 


xx.]  Historic  notes.  421 

form  'No  S  is  P',  whereas  S  —  P  would  have  stood  for  '8 
»P\ 

(The  reader  will  understand  that  a  variety  of  other 
notations  might  have  been  added  to  the  above  had  there 
been  any  object  in  making  a  longer  list.) 

II.  On  the  employment  of  geometrical  diagrams  for  the 
sensible  representation  of  logical  propositions. 

A  few  preliminary  words  will  be  desirable  in  order  to 
point  out  the  limits  of  this  notice.  It  is  intended  here  to 
take  account  of  those  schemes  only  which  deal  directly  with 
propositions,  and  which  analyse  them  ;  that  is,  which  in  some 
way  or  other  exhibit  the  relation  of  the  subject  to  the  predi- 
cate. Hence  two  kinds  of  diagram  of  great  antiquity  in 
Logic,  will  have  to  be  entirely  rejected.  The  first  of  these  is 
the  so-called  Porphyrian  tree.  This  only  represents  the 
mutual  relation  of  classes  to  one  another  in  the  way  of  genus 
and  species,  by  continued  subdivision  ;  and  though  of  course 
giving  rise  to  propositions  it  cannot  be  said  in  any  way  to 
portray  them.  The  other  is  the  triangle  of  which  the  three 
extremities  are  used  to  represent  the  three  terms  of  the 
syllogism.  The  same  outline  of  a  diagram  here  serves  for 
any  kind  of  proposition,  and  all  that  is  meant  to  be  illustrated 
by  the  figure,  is,  that  we  may  by  means  of  reasoning  connect 
the  extremes  A  and  C  (so  to  say,  along  one  side)  instead  of 
connecting  A  with  B,  and  then  B  with  C  (along  the  two 
sides).  In  this  sort  of  diagrams  no  kind  of  analysis  of  pro- 
positions is  attempted,  and  it  can  hardly  be  claimed  for  them 
that  they  are  any  real  aid  to  the  mind  in  complicated  trains 
of  reasoning.  A  historic  sketch  of  their  origin  will  be  found 
in  Hamilton's  Discussions,  Ed.  in.  p.  666. 

As  regards  then  the  employment  of  what  I  term  ana- 


422  Historic  notes.  [CHAP. 

lytical  diagrams, — viz.  those  meant  to  distinguish  between 
subject  and  predicate,  and  also  between  the  different  kinds 
of  proposition, — there  can  be  little  doubt  that  their  practical 
employment  dates  from  Euler.  That  is  to  say,  he  first 
familiarized  logicians  to  their  use,  and  the  particular  kind 
of  circular  diagram  which  he  employed  has  consequently 
very  commonly  been  named  after  him.  But  their  actual 
origin  is  very  much  earlier  than  this.  The  earliest  instance 
that  I  have  seen  is  in  the  De  Censura  Veri  of  Ludovicus 
Vives1,  where  the  mutual  relations  of  the  three  terms  in 
Barbara,  as  given  by  the  two  premises,  are  represented 
veiy  much  as  on  the  Eulerian  plan.  He  speaks  of  repre- 
senting them  by  means  of  containing  triangles,  but  the 
actual  figures  drawn  are  those  of  the  letter  V,  as  thus, 


This  is  the  only  diagram  to  be  found,  I  believe,  in  the  work. 
Priority  in  this  direction  has  also  been  claimed  by 
Hamilton  for  Alsted,  who,  as  he  maintains,  had  in  his 
Si/sterna  logicce  (1614)  anticipated  the  linear  kind  of  diagram 
proposed  by  Lambert  and  which  will  presently  be  explained. 
I  cannot  however  perceive  that  Alsted  had  the  slightest  idea 
of  representing  what  Euler  and  the  others  aimed  at  rcpre- 

1   His    words    are:    "Si    aliqua  c    est  o :    adhibeatur  regula  quam 

pars  a  capit  totum  b,  et  aliqua  pars  diximus  ease  canonem  artium  et  vita 

fccapittotum  c,  c  totum  capietur  ab  totius".    De  Censura  Veri,  Lib.  n. 

a  :  ut,  si  tres  trianguli  pingantur,  (My  attention  was  directed  to  this  by 

quorum    unus  li    sit   niaxiinus,   et  F. A.."La,nge'BLogiacheStudien, p.  10.) 

capiet  altcrum  A ,  tertius  sit  minimus  I  do  not  understand  how  the  capital 

intra  A,  qui  sit  C,  ita  dicimus,  si  and    small  letters  here  agree  with 

otune  b  est  a,  et  omne  c  est  b,  omne  each  other. 


xx.]  Historic  notes.  423 

senting.  All  that  he  says  (speaking  of  the  first  figure),  is 
that  the  middle  term  is  'below'  the  major  term  and  'above' 
the  minor,  and  he  just  draws  three  lines  of  equal  length, 
one  under  the  other,  to  illustrate  what  he  means.  "  Etenim 
omne  medium,  quod  est  inter  duo  extrema  secundum  alti- 
tudinem,  id  est,  inter  extremum  superius  et  inferius,  illuJ 
inquam  medium  debet  habere  aliquod  extremum  supra  se, 
et  aliquod  infra  se.  Atqui  medius  terminus  in  prima  figura 
est  talis:  habet  enim  terminum  supra  se,  nempe  praedi- 
catum  conclusionis  in  majore  propositione  positum,  et  habet 
terminum  infra  se  positum,  nempe  subjectum  conclusionis  in 
minore  propositione  positum Diagrainma  est  tale  : — 

Animal          , 


sentit 

a 


homo 


There  is  nothing  in  this, — the  only  diagram  of  the  sort 
which  he  gives,— even  to  suggest  the  distinction  between 
affirmative  and  negative,  universal  and  particular,  proposi- 
tions, which  is  the  least  we  can  look  for  in  these  sensible 
illustrations. 

The  first  logician  apparently  to  make  free  use  of  dia- 
grams was  Chr.  Weise,  Rector  of  Zittau,  who  died  in  1708. 
He  seems  to  have  published  some  works  on  logic  himself, 
and  his  system  is  said  to  be  given  in  the  Nucleus  Logicae 
Weisianae  of  J.  C.  Lange,  (1712).  I  have  not  succeeded  in 
seeing  this  work,  but  judging  by  what  Lambert  says  of  it 
(Architectonic,  I.  128),  I  gather  that  he  makes  free  use  of 
circles  and  squares  for  the  purpose  of  representing  proposi- 
tions. Hamilton  (Logic,  I.  256)  confirms  this  statement. 

In  the  only  work  by  Lange  to  which  I  have  been  able 
to  obtain  access,  viz.  his  Inventum  novum  Quadratilogici , 
there  is  nothing  which  strikes  me  as  of  any  great  merit. 


424  Historic  notes.  [CHAP. 

There  are  a  number  of  geometrical  figures  represented,  both 
plane  and  solid,  but  the  author  does  not  seem  to  have 
grasped  the  essential  conception  of  illustrating  in  this  way 
the  mutual  intersection,  or  otherwise,  of  two  or  more  classes 
by  means  of  his  figures.  All  that  he  represents  is  continued 
sub-division:  e.g.  that  of  A  into  B  and  C,  of  B  into  D  and 
E,  and  C  into  F  and  G,  and  so  forth.  This  he  sets  forth 
by  a  parallelogram  for  A  ;  under  it  is  put  a  similar  one 
divided  into  two  equal  parts  to  denote  B  and  (7,  the  next  in 
order  having  four  divisions,  and  so  on.  All  that  this  properly 
represents  is  the  doctrine  of  Division  or  continued  Dicho- 
tomy; i.e.  the  entire  exclusion  of  B  by  C,  and  the  entire 
inclusion  of  D  and  E  in  B,  and  so  forth.  There  is  no  at- 
tempt to  represent  the  various  relations  of  two  terms,  B 
and  C,  to  one  another,  as  set  forth  in  the  various  forms  of 
proposition  which  have  B  and  C  for  their  subject  and  predicate. 
We  now  come  to  Euler's  well-known  circles  which  were 
first  described  in  his  Lettres  d  une  Princesse  cFAllemayne 
(Letters  102 — 105).  The  weak  point  about  these  consists 
in  the  fact  that  they  only  illustrate  in  strictness  the  actual 
relations  of  classes  to  one  another,  rather  than  the  imperfect 
knowledge  of  these  relations  which  we  may  possess,  or  wish 
to  convey,  by  means  of  the  proposition.  Accordingly  they 
will  not  fit  in  with  the  propositions  of  common  logic,  but 
demand  the  constitution  of  a  new  group  of  appropriate 
elementary  propositions1.  This  defect  must  have  been  noticed 
from  the  first  in  the  case  of  the  particular  affirmative  and 
negative,  for  the  same  diagram  is  commonly  employed  to 
stand  for  them  both,  which  it  does  indifferently  well : 


Some  A  is  B, 
Some  A  is  not 


1  See  the  discussion  on  this  point  in  ch.  i,  p.  5. 


xx.]  Historic  notes.  425 

for  the  real  relation  thus  exhibited  by  the  figure  is  of 
course  "some  (only)  A  is  some  (only)  B",  and  this  quantified 
proposition  has  no  place  in  the  ordinary  scheme. 

Euler  himself  indicated  the  distinction  (at  least  so  I 
judge  by  his  diagram)  by  the  position  in  which  he  put  the 
letter  A ;  if  this  stood  in  the  '  A  not-B '  compartment  it 
meant  'some  A  is  not  B\  if  in  the  AB  compartment  it 
meant  'some  A  is  B'.  But  the  common  way  of  meeting 
the  difficulty  where  it  is  at  all  recognized,  is  by  the  use  of 
dotted  lines  to  indicate  our  uncertainty  as  to  where  the 
boundary  should  lie.  So  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  find, 
this  plan  (as  applied  to  closed  figures)  was  first  employed  by 
Dr  Thomson  in  his  Laws  of  Thought,  but  was  doubtless 
suggested  by  the  device  of  Lambert,  to  be  presently  ex- 
plained. It  has  been  praised  for  its  ingenuity  and  success 
by  De  Morgan,  and  adopted  by  Prof.  Jevons  and  a  number 
of  others.  Ueberweg  has  employed  a  somewhat  more  com- 
plicated scheme  of  a  similar  kind. 

Any  modifications  of  this  sort  seem  to  me  (as  already 
explained  in  Chap.  I.)  wholly  mis-aimed  and  ineffectual.  If 
we  want  to  represent  our  uncertainty  about  the  correct  em- 
ployment of  a  diagram,  the  only  consistent  way  is  to  draw  all 
the  figures  which  are  covered  by  the  assigned  propositions 
and  say  frankly  that  we  do  not  know  which  is  the  appro- 
priate one.  Of  course  this  plan  would  be  troublesome  when 
several  propositions  have  to  be  combined,  as  the  consequent 
number  of  diagrams  would  be  considerable.  Thus  in 
Bokardo,  two  diagrams  would  be  needed  for  the  major 
premise  and  two  for  the  minor,  making  four  in  all. 

The  traditional  logic  has  been  so  entirely  confined  to  the 
simultaneous  treatment  of  three  terms  only  (this  being  the 
number  demanded  for  the  syllogism)  that  hardly  any  at- 
tempts have  been  made  to  represent  diagrammatically  the 


426  Historic  notes.  [CHAP. 

combinations  of  four  terms  and  upwards.  The  only  serious 
attempt  that  I  have  seen  in  this  way  is  by  Bolzano1.  He 
was  evidently  trying  under  the  right  conception,  viz.  to 
construct  diagrams  which  should  illustrate  all  the  combina- 
tions producible  by  the  class  terms  employed,  but  he  adopted 
an  impracticable  method  in  using  modified  Eulerian  dia- 
grams. The  consequence  is  that  he  has  effected  no  general 
solution,  though  exhibiting  a  number  of  more  or  less  in- 
genious figures  to  illustrate  special  cases.  Thus  a  collection 
of  small  circles  included  in  a  large  one  represents  a  nu  mber 
of  species  (mutually  exclusive)  comprehended  under  one 
genus,  though,  since  the  small  circles  cannot  fill  up  all  the 
contents  of  the  large  one  we  cannot  thus  conveniently  re- 
present the  exhaustion  of  the  genus  by  the  aggregate  of 
the  species ;  a  row  of  such  circles,  each  of  them  interlinked 
with  the  next,  represents  the  case  of  a  succession  of  species 
each  of  which  has  something  in  common  with  the  next,  and 
so  forth. 

The  most  ingenious  of  his  figures  for  four  terms  is  the 
following.  I  give  it  here  in  order  to  show  the  necessary 
shortcomings  of  this  method : — 


It  is  offered  in  representation  of  the  proposition  "A  which 
is  B  is  the  same  as  G  which  is  D ".  It  must  have  taken 
some  trouble  to  arrange  it,  so  that  as  regards  economy  of 
time  any  such  resort  would  be  decidedly  the  reverse  of  an 

1     This  statement  should  be  cor-       Naturgesetze,  as  referred  to  in  the 
rected  here  by  reference  to  Scheffler'a      Introductory  chapter. 


xx.]  Historic  notes.  427 

aid.  Moreover,  as  the  reader  will  readily  perceive,  it  is  not 
quite  correct.  One  possible  subdivision,  viz.  A  BCD,  has 
been  omitted,  for  there  is  nothing  in  the  statement  to  forbid 
the  occurrence  of  BD  which  is  neither  A  nor  C.  Hence 
the  correct  state  of  things  would  be  better  exhibited  thus, 
on  the  scheme  of  notation  adopted  in  this  work : 


With  the  exception  of  that  of  Bolzano,  I  have  seen  no 
attempt  to  extend  diagrammatic  notation  to  the  results  of 
four  terms,  and  it  is  only  quite  recently  that  really  adequate 
figures  have  been  proposed  for  those  of  three  terms : — for 
instance  both  Drobisch  and  Schroder  have  used  what  we  may 
call  the  three-circle  d  iagram l.  In  saying  this,  I  do  not  of  course 
mean  to  imply  that  the  problem  was  one  of  any  particular 
difficulty,  but  merely  state  the  fact  that  general  satisfaction 
being  felt  with  the  Eulerian  plan  no  serious  attempts  were 
made  to  modify  it.  Indeed,  except  on  the  part  of  those  who 
wrote  and  thought  under  the  influence  of  Boole,  directly  or 
indirectly,  it  was  scarcely  likely  that  need  should  be  felt  for 
any  more  generalized  scheme. 

The  essential  characteristic  of  the  Eulerian  plan  being 
that  of  representing  directly  and  immediately  the  inclusion 
and  exclusion  of  classes,  it  is  clear  that  the  employment  of 
circles  as  distinguished  from  any  other  closed  figures  is 
a  mere  accident.  Nor  have  circles  in  fact  always  been 

1  These  writers  merely  represent  adopt  the  subsequent  step  of  using 
in  this  way  the  class  combinations  them  as  a  basis  for  representing 
or  subdivisions  as  such :  they  do  not  propositions. 


428  Historic  notes.  [CHAP. 

employed.  Thus  Ploucquet, — whose  system  however,  as  he 
himself  pointed  out,  in  contrast  with  that  of  Lambert,  is 
essentially  symbolic  and  not  diagrammatic, — has  made  use 
of  squares.  Kant  (Logik,  I.  §  21)  and  De  Morgan  (Formal 
Logic,  p.  9)  have  introduced  or  suggested  both  a  square 
and  a  circle  into  the  same  diagram,  one  standing  for  subject 
and  the  other  for  predicate ;  with  the  view  of  distinguishing 
between  these.  Mr  R.  G.  Latham  (Logic,  p.  88)  and  Mr 
Leechman  (Logic,  p.  66)  have  a  square,  circle,  and  triangle 
all  in  one  figure  for  the  same  purpose,  presumably,  of  dis- 
tinguishing between  the  three  terms  in  the  syllogism.  Bolzano 
again,  in  one  of  the  examples  above  adduced,  has  had  resort 
to  parallelograms  :  to  which  indeed,  or  to  ellipses  or  to  some 
such  figure,  it  is  evident  he  must  have  appealed  if  he  wished 
to  set  before  us  the  outcome  of  four  class  terms.  But  to 
regard  these  as  constituting  distinct  schemes  of  notation 
would  be  idle.  They  all  do  exactly  the  same  thing, 
viz.  they  aim  at  so  arranging  two  (or  more)  closed  figures 
that  these  shall  represent  the  mutual  relation  of  inclusion 
and  exclusion  of  the  various  classes  denoted  by  the  terms  we 
employ. 

There  is  one  modification  of  this  plan  which  deserves 
passing  notice  both  on  its  own  account  and  because  it  has 
been  so  misjudged  by  Hamilton.  It  is  that  of  Maass.  In 
order  to  understand  it  we  must  recall  one  essential  defect 
of  the  customary  plan.  Representing  as  this  does  the  final 
outcome  of  the  class  relation,  it  is  clear  that  every  fresh 
proposition  may  demand  a  diagram  new  from  the  beginning. 
If  we  have  drawn  a  scheme  for  "All  A  is  B  ",  we  must  abandon 
it  and  draw  another  for  "All  B  is  A".  Seeing  this,  appa- 
rently, Maass  took  two  fixed  lines  enclosing  an  angle,  and 
.regarded  the  third  line  which  combined  with  them  to  form 
the  necessary  closed  figure,  as  movable.  Hence  only  one  line 


xx.]  Historic  notes.  429 

had   to  be   altered  in  order  to  meet  the  new  information 
contained  in  such  a  second  proposition.     (Logik,  p.  294.) 

Thus  let  AB  and  AC  be  the  fixed  lines ;  and  the  triangle 
ADE  represent  the  class  X,  and  AFG  represent  the  class 
Y.  If  FG  remain  where  it  is  we  have  "All  X  is  Y", 
whilst  in  order  to  represent  "All  X  is  all  F"  we  have  only 
to  conceive  FG  transferred  so  as  to  coincide  with  DE.  This 


^  js     a     c 

seems  to  me  to  constitute  the  essential  characteristic  of  his 
scheme,  which  is  worked  out  in  a  variety  of  figures  of  a 
more  or  less  complicated  kind.  It  is  decidedly  cumbrous, 
and  not  entirely  effective  as  regards  this  its  main  aim,  but  it 
deserves  recognition  as  an  attempt  to  remedy  a  real  defect 
in  the  ordinary  scheme. 

Hamilton  who,  as  we  know,  never  could  succeed  in  grasping 
the  nature  of  a  triangle,  entirely  misconceived  all  this; 
and  seeing  that  Maass  began  by  talking  of  an  angle,  he  con- 
cluded that  angles  were  being  employed  as  the  repre- 
sentative of  class  relations.  Hence  his  judgment,  hurled 
in  a  blast  of  wrathful  and  contemptuous  epithets,  that  this 
is  "  the  only  attempt  made  to  illustrate  Logic,  not  by  the 
relations  of  geometrical  quantities,  but  by  the  relations  of 
geometrical  relations, — angles  "  (Logic,  II.  463). 

The  above  schemes  aim  at  representing  the  relative  ex- 
tent of  class  terms  by  the  really  analogous  case  of  the  relative 
extent  of  closed  figures,  which  therefore  tell  their  tale  some- 
what directly.  A  departure  from  this  plan  was  made,  very 


430  Historic  notes,  [CHAP. 

shortly  after  the  date  of  Euler's  letters,  by  Lambert,  who 
introduced  a  more  indirect  scheme  of  diagrammatic  notation. 
He  indicates  the  extent  of  a  class  term  by  a  straight'  line ; 
the  inclusion  of  one  term  in  another  being  represented  by 
drawing  a  shorter  line  under  the  other,  the  exclusion  of 
two  by  each  other  by  drawing  them  side  by  side,  whilst  the 
corresponding  case  to  the  intersecting  circles  is  presented  by 
drawing  one  line  partially  under  the  other,  thus 
Hence  Celarent  might  be  represented : 

B  .  _  A      No  B  is  A, 

C  All  C  is  B, 

:.  NoCis^l. 

So  far  the  scheme  is  of  essentially  the  same  kind  as  that 
of  Euler1,  the  only  important  difference  being  that  the  com- 
mon part  of  the  extent  of  the  two  terms  is  not  here  indicative 
of  identity ;  for  the  line  G  is  thus  only  drawn  under  B  and  not 
made  coincident  with  it.  This  was  noticed  at  once  by 
Ploucquet,  whose  theory  of  propositions  turned  entirely  on 
the  identity  of  subject  and  predicate  and  consequent  quanti- 
fication of  the  predicate.  He  maintains  that  Lambert  would 
do  better  to  draw  the  second  line,  in  an  affirmative  pro- 
position, wholly  or  partially  coincident  with  the  first,  and 
so  secure  this  identity  (Sammlung,  p.  182).  Since  however 

1  The    analogy  which   Lambert  represent  the  individuals  which  stand 

actually  had  in  view  seems  however  tinder    that    concept.     And    again, 

to  have  been  different.    He  evidently  "  Ferner  fordert  der  Ausdruck,  dass 

was  influenced,  like  Alsted,  by  the  alle  A  unter  B  gehoren,  von  Wort  zu 

technical  expression,  "  thinking  ob-  Wort  genommen,  dass  man  die  Linie 

jects  as  under  such  and  such  a  con  -  .  I  nnter    /;  setzen  miisse  ".     (Dian. 

cept",  which  to  modern  ears  would  §   181.)      The    impropriety    of   this 

sound  as  little  more  than  a  play  on  analogy  was  pointed  out  at  the  time 

words.     Thus   he  draws   a  line    to  by  Holland  (Lambert's  Briefwecluel, 

represent  the  general  concept  and  i.  17). 
puts  a  row  of  dots  underneath  to 


xx.]  Historic  notes.  431 

the  help  to  the  eye  would  then   be  nearly  lost,  such   an 
alteration   would   simply  result   in  a   poor  and   faulty  imi- 
tation of  the  Eulerian  scheme. 

Lambert  however  did  not  stop  here.     Like  most  other 
clear  thinkers  he  recognized  the  flaw  in  all  these  methods, 
viz.  that  we  cannot  represent  the  uncertain  distribution  of 
the  predicate  whilst  we  employ  one  and  the  same  diagram  for 
"All  A  is  B",  whether  the  predicate  be  'all'  or'  only  'some' 
B.     He  endeavoured  to  remedy  this  defect  by  the  employ- 
ment of  dotted  lines,  thus  : 

B  ............  _  _  ............ 

A     _ 

This  means  that  A  certainly  covers  a  part  of  B,  viz.  the  con- 
tinuous part;  and  may  cover  the  rest,  viz.  the  dotted  part, 
the  dots  representing  our  uncertainty.  In  this  case  the 
scheme  answers  fairly  well,  such  use  of  dots  not  being  open 
to  the  objection  maintainable  against  it  when  circles  are 
employed.  But  when  he  comes  to  extend  this  to  particular 
propositions  his  use  of  dotted  lines  ceases  to  be  consistent  or 
even,  to  me,  intelligible.  One  would  have  expected  him  to 
write  '  some  A  is  B  '  thus, 

B  -    -  ......... 


for  by  different  filling  in  of  the  lines  we  could  cover  the 
case  of  there  being  '  B  which  is  not  A',  and  so  forth.  But 
he  does  draw  it 

B- 
A  ..................... 

which  might  consistently  be  interpreted  to  cover  the  case 
of  'no  A  is  B',  as  well  as  suggesting  the  possibility  of  there 
being  no  A  at  all. 

Lambert's  use  however  of  this  modification  of  his  scheme 


432  Historic  notes.  [CHAP. 

is  so  obscure,  and,  when  he  comes  to  work  out  the  syllogistic 
figures  in  detail,  is  so  partially  adhered  to,  that  it  does  not 
seem  worth  the  expenditure  of  further  time  and  thought. 
As  a  whole,  it  seems  to  me  distinctly  inferior  to  the  scheme 
of  Euler,  and  has  in  consequence  been  very  little  employed  by 
other  logicians.  Indeed  I  cannot  recall  any  who  have  made 
use  of  it  except  Ulrich  (Institutiones  log.  et  met.  p.  171). 
Hamilton  also  (Logic,  I.  p.  189)  has  a  plan  something  of  the 
same  sort,  but  no  use  is  elsewhere  made  of  it  by  him. 

Hamilton's  own  system  of  notation  is  pretty  well  known. 
It  is  given  in  his  Logic  (end  of  Vol.  n.)  with  a  table,  and  is 
described  in  his  Discussions.  Some  account  of  it  will  also 
be  found  in  Dr  Thomson's  Laws  of  Thought.  It  has  been 
described  (by  himself)  as  "easy,  simple,  compendious,  all- 
sufficient,  consistent,  manifest,  precise,  complete  "  ;  the  corre- 
sponding antithetic  adjectives  being  freely  expended  in  the 
description  of  the  schemes  of  those  who  had  gone  before  him. 
To  my  thinking  it  does  not  deserve  to  rank  as  a  diagram- 
matic scheme  at  all,  though  he  does  class  it  with  the  others 
as  "geometric"  :  but  is  purely  symbolical.  What  was  aimed 
at  in  the  methods  above  described  was  something  that  should 
explain  itself  at  once,  as  in  the  circles  of  Euler,  or  need  but  a 
hint  of  explanation,  as  in  the  lines  of  Lambert.  But  there 
is  clearly  nothing  in  the  two  ends  of  a  wedge  to  suggest 
subjects  and  predicates,  or  in  a  colon  and  comma  to  suggest 
distribution  and  non-distribution. 

So  far  we  have  considered  merely  the  case  of  categorical 
propositions ;  it  still  remains  to  say  a  few  words  as  to  the 
attempts  made  thus  to  represent  other  kinds  of  proposition. 
The  Hypothetical  may  be  dismissed  at  once,  probably  no 
logician  having  supposed  that  these  should  be  exhibited  in 
diagrams  so  as  to  come  out  in  any  way  distinct  from  cate- 
goricals.  Of  course  when  we  consider  the  hypothetical  form 


xx.]  Historic  notes.  433 

as  an  optional  rendering  which  only  differs  verbally  from 
the  categorical,  we  may  regard  our  diagrams  as  representing 
either  form  indifferently.  But  this  course,  which  I  regard 
as  the  sound  one,  belongs  essentially  to  the  modern  or 
class  view  of  the  import  of  propositions.  Those  who  adopt 
the  judgment  interpretation  can  hardly  in  consistency  come 
to  any  other  conclusion  than  that  hypotheticals  are  distinct 
from  categoricals,  and  do  not  as  such  admit  of  diagram- 
matic representation. 

The  Disjunctive  stands  on  a  rather  different  footing,  and 
some  attention  has  been  directed  to  its  representation  from 
the  very  first.  Lambert,  for  instance,  has  represented  what 
we  must  regard  as  a  particular  case  of  disjunction,  viz.  the 
subordination  of  a  plurality  of  species  to  a  genus,  after  this 
fashion : — 


X       Y       Z 

This   of  course   indicates   the  fact   that   the   threa   classes, 
X,  Y,  Z,  together  make  up  the  extent  of  A. 

It  will  be  seen  that  we  thus  treat  the  species  as  mutually 
exclusive,  and  very  appropriately  so,  such  mutual  exclusive- 
ness  being  the  natural  characteristic  of  all  true  species. 
When  however  we  attempt  to  adapt  this  linear  scheme  to 
the  more  comprehensive  case  of  alternatives  which  are  not 
mutually  exclusive,  we  soon  find  it  fail  us.  Two  non-ex- 
clusive alternatives  indeed  can  be  thus  displayed,  for  such  a 
scheme  as  the  following  will  adequately  mark  the  three  cases 


covered  by  "All  A  is  either  X  or  Y"  ;  viz.  that  of  any  par- 
ticular A  being  X  only,   Y  only,  and  both  X  and  Y.     But 
V.  L.  28 


434  Historic  notes.  [CHAP. 

make  the  same  attempt  with  three  classes,  X,  Y,  Z\  and 
we  readily  see  that  it  breaks  down.  We  cannot  possibly 
represent,  by  lines,  the  seven  cases  covered  by  "  All  A  is 
either  X  or  Y"  or  Z" :  (If  the  reader  will  try  he  will  find  that 
no  arrangement  will  yield  more  than  six  of  the  needed  com- 
binations unless  we  make  one  of  the  lines  discontinuous,  by 
breaking  it  into  portions,)  and  accordingly  we  should  be 
forced  to  appeal  to  closed  figures  which  possess  slightly 
greater  capabilities  in  this  respect. 

Having  just  stated  that  Lambert  has  fairly  represented  a 
case  of  exclusive  alternatives  in  disjunction,  I  must  call  at- 
tention to  the  fact  that  he  expressly  says  that  disjunctives  do 
not  admit  of  diagrammatic  representation  *.  And  his  reason 
for  so  thinking  deserves  notice,  as  indicative  of  that  deep 
distinction  between  the  different  accounts  of  the  nature  of 
propositions  to  which  I  have  already  had  to  allude.  Starting 
with  the  assumption  that  B  and  C  must  be  exclusive,  he 
says  that  to  represent '  A  is  either  B  or  C'  we  may  begin  by 
drawing  the  lines  for  B  and  0  beside  one  another,  but  then 
comes  in  the  uncertainty  that  we  do  not  know  under  which 
of  the  two  we  are  to  set  the  A  line.  We  have  grounded 
on  a  mere  hypothetical  and  can  get  no  further.  What  we 
are  here  doing  is  to  regard  A  as  a  Begriff  or  concept,  in 
which  case  it  becomes  a  unity,  and  we  are  then  naturally  in 
uncertainty  as  to  whether  to  refer  it  to  B  or  (7.  The  case  is 
much  the  same  as  if  we  had  to  exhibit  the  individual  dis- 
junctive 'Socrates  is  either  awake  or  asleep'.  But  interpret 
A  in  its  class  extent,  and  the  disjunctive  'A  is  either  B 
or  C '  becomes  '  the  classes  B  and  C  together  make  up  A ', 
which  is  essentially  the  same  state  of  things  as  is  readily 
represented  by  the  subordination  of  species  to  a  genus. 

1  "Die  disjunct! ven  Siib.e  lassen      setzen."      (Neues    Organon,    Dian, 
fiich  gar  nicht  zeichnen,  und  zwar      §  190.) 
wiedcrum,  wcil  sie  nichts  positives 


xx.]  Historic  notes.  435 

For  the  general  representation  of  disjunctives,  on  this 
plan,  Euler's  circles  do  not  answer  much  better  than 
Lambert's  lines.  In  fact  we  cannot  even  represent  'All 
A  is  B  or  G  (only} '  by  circles,  but  are  confined  to  '  All  A  is 
B  or  C  (or  both) ',  as  thus  : — 


for  if  the  B  and  G  circles  are  not  caused  to  intersect  one 
another,  the  A  circle  will  of  course  have  to  include  some- 
thing which  lies  outside  them,  and  accordingly  the  point 
aimed  at  in  the  disjunction  fails  to  be  represented. 

Kant  (LogiTc,  I.  §  29)  may  be  also  noticed  here  as  one 
of  the  very  few  logicians  who  have  given  a  diagram  to 
illustrate  disjunctives.  Like  Lambert, — in  fact  like  so  many 
logicians, — he  makes  all  disjunctives  mutually  exclusive. 
All  he  does  indeed  is  to  take  a  square  and  divide  it  up 
into  four  smaller  squares;  these  four  dividing  members 
therefore  just  make  up  between  them  the  whole  sphere  of 
the  divided  concept.  So  few  however  have  been  the  at- 
tempts to  represent  Disjunctives  in  Logic  that  it  seems 
hardly  worth  while  to  pursue  the  subject  any  further. 

Before  quitting  these  historical  points  I  may  briefly  notice 
an  application  to  which  diagrammatic  notation  very  readily 
lends  itself,  but  which  seems  to  me  none  the  less  an  abusive 
employment  of  it.  I  refer  to  the  attempt  to  represent 
quantitatively  the  relative  extent  of  the  terms.  When,  for 
instance,  we  have  drawn,  either  by  lines  or  circles,  a  figure 
to  represent  '  All  A  is  B '  it  strikes  us  at  once  that  we  have 
got  another  element  at  our  service ;  or,  as  a  mathematician 

28—2 


43G  Historic  notes.  [CHAP. 

would  say,  there  is  still  a  disposable  constant.  We  may 
draw  the  B  circle,  or  line,  of  any  size  or  length  we  please ; 
why  not  then  so  draw  it  as  to  represent  the  relative  ex- 
tension of  the  B  class  as  compared  with  the  A  class  ? 

This  idea  seems  to  have  occurred  to  logicians  almost  from 
the  first,  as  was  indeed  natural,  considering  that  the  use  of 
diagrams  was  of  course  borrowed  from  mathematics,  and  that 
a  clear  boundary  line  was  not  always  drawn  between  the 
two  sciences.  Thus  Lambert  certainly  seems  to  maintain 
that  in  strictness  we  must  suppose  each  line  to  bear  to  any 
other  the  due  proportionate  length  assigned  by  the  extension 
of  the  terms.  He  even  recognizes  the  difficulty  in  the  case 
of  a  single  line,  viz.  as  to  what  length  it  should  be  drawn, 
resolving  this  however  by  the  consideration  that  the  unit  of 
length  being  at  our  choice,  any  length  will  do  if  the  unit 
be  chosen  accordingly.  In  the  latter  part  of  the  Neues 
Organon, — where  he  is  dealing  with  questions  of  Probability, 
and  the  numerically,  or  rather  proportionately,  definite  syllo- 
gism,— the  length  of  the  lines  which  represent  the  extent 
of  the  concepts  becomes  very  important.  So  little  was  he 
prepared  to  regard  the  diagram  as  referring  solely  to  the 
purely  logical  considerations  of  presence  and  absence  of  class 
characteristics,  of  inclusion  and  exclusion  of  classes  by  one 
another. 

Of  course  if  considerations  of  this  kind  were  to  be  taken 
into  account  it  would  follow  almost  necessarily  that  circles 
should  be  abandoned  in  the  formation  of  our  diagrams ;  since 
their  relative  magnitude,  or  rather  the  relative  magnitude  of 
the  figures  produced  by  their  intersection,  is  not  at  all  an 
easy  matter  of  intuitive  observation.  We  should  be  reduced 
to  the  choice  of  lines  or  parallelograms,  so  that  the  almost 
exclusive  employment  of  Eulerian  circles  has  caused  this 
quantitative  application  to  be  much  less  adopted  than  would 


xx.]  Historic  notes,  437 

otherwise  probably  have  been  the  case.  This  application, 
however,  has  been  made  quite  recently  by.F.  A.  Lange 
(Logische  Studien),  who  in  one  of  his  Essays  has  made  con- 
siderable use  of  diagrammatic  methods  in  illustration  of  the 
Logic  of  Probability1.  But  I  cannot  regard  the  success  of 
such  a  plan  as  encouraging.  For  the  alternative  forced  upon 
us  is  this : — If  we  adhere  to  geometrical  figures  that  are 
continuous,  then  the  shapes  of  the  various  subdivisions  soon 
become  complicated ;  for,  by  the  time  we  have  reached  four 
or  even  three  terms,  their  combinations  would  result  in 
yielding  awkward  compartments,  whose  relative  areas  could 
not  be  estimated  intuitively.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  take 
our  stand  on  having  ultimate  compartments  whose  relative 
magnitudes  admit  of  ready  computation  we  are  driven  to 
abandon  continuous  figures.  Our  ABC  compartment,  say, 
instead  of  being  enclosed  in  a  ring  fence  is  scattered  about 
the  field  like  an  ill-arranged  German  principality  of  olden 
times,  and  its  component  portions  require  to  be  brought 
together  in  order  to  collect  the  whole  before  the  eye.  We 
draw  a  parallelogram  to  stand  for  A,  and  divide  it  into  its 
B  and  not-B  parts.  If  we  divide  each  of  these  again  into 
their  G  and  not-(7  parts,  we  shall  find  that  the  B  and  not-J5, 
the  C  and  not-(7  compartments  will  not  lie  in  juxtaposition 
with  each  other,  and  therefore  the  eye  cannot  conveniently 
gather  them  up  into  single  groups.  In  fact  such  a  plan 
almost  necessarily  leads  to  that  primitive  arrangement  pro- 
posed by  J.  C.  Lange,  and  mentioned  at  the  outset  of  this 
discussion.  Whatever  elegance  logical  diagrams  can  possess, 

1  Every  student  of  Probability  is  upon  a  frame-work  will  strike  such 

of  course  familiar  enough  with  the  and  such  a  partition  we  are  employing 

converse  case,  viz.  that  of  reducing  the  same  analogy  as  when  we  resort 

spatial  relations  to  symbolic  state-  to  diagrammatic  representation  of  one 

ment.     Whenever  we  compute  the  of  these  quantitative  logical  proposi- 

chance  that  a  ball  dropped  at  random  tions. 


438  Historic  notes.  [CHAP.  xx. 

and  whatever  aid  they  can  give  to  the  mind  through  the 
sense  of  sight,  seem  thus  to  be  forfeited. 

My  own  conviction  is  very  decided  that  all  introduction 
of  considerations  such  as  these  should  be  avoided  as  tending 
to  confound  the  domains  of  Logic  and  Mathematics;  of  that 
which  is,  broadly  speaking,  qualitative,  and  that  which  is 
quantitative.  The  compartments  yielded  by  our  diagram? 
must  be  regarded  solely  in  the  light  of  being  bounded  by 
such  and  such  contours,  as  lying  inside  or  outside  such  and 
such  lines.  We  must  abstract  entirely  from  all  considera- 
tion of  their  relative  magnitude,  as  we  do  of  their  actual 
shape,  and  trace  no  more  connection  between  these  facts  and 
the  logical  extension  of  the  terms  which  they  represent  than 
we  do  between  this  logical  extension  and  the  size  and  shape 
of  the  letter  symbols,  A  and  B  and  C. 


INDEX  OF  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  REFERENCES. 


[The  reader  will  understand  that  this  Index  does  not  aim  at  being  in  any 
way  exhaustive.  It  is  merely  a  list  of  publications  referred  to  as  bearing  on 
the  topics  specially  characteristic  of  this  work.  It  is  confined  also,  with  one 
exception,  to  such  as  I  have  consulted  myself ;  and  which  seemed  to  me  to 
be  worth  referring  to.  The  asterisk  marks  those  which  are  specially  symbolic 
in  a  logical  sense,  in  the  whole  or  some  part  of  their  treatment.  For  conve- 
nience of  reference  I  indicate  the  date  of  the  work,  or  of  the  particular 
edition  consulted.] 

Alsted,  J.  H.    Logicffi  systema  harmonicum  (1614),  422. 

Bachmann,  C.  F.     System  der  Logik  (1828),  94,  392. 
*Bain,  A.    Logic;  Deduction,  pp.  190 — 207  (1870),  xxxix,  285. 
*Bardili,  E.  G.     Grundriss  der  ersten  Logik  (1800),  81. 

Baynes,  T.  S.     Essay  on  the  New  Analytic  of  Logical  Forms  (1850),  9,  88, 
174. 

Beneke,  F.  E.    Lehrbuch  der  Logik  (1832),  134,  392. 

Bentham,  G.     Outline  of  a  New  System  of  Logic  (1827),  8,  417. 

Bernoulli,  James.    Parallelismus  ratiocinii  logici  et  algebraici  (1685;  Opera 
I.  214),  xi,  411. 

Bolzano,  B.    Logik  (1837),  426. 

*  Boole,  G.     The  mathematical  Analysis  of  Logic  (1847),  165,  174. 

*  —       Camb.  Math.  Journal.    Vol.  in.  (1848),  xxxvii. 
The  claims  of  Science  (Lecture  at  Cork,  1851),  xviii. 

*      The  Laws  of  Thought  (1854).    Passim. 

Differential  Equations  (1865),  68,  70. 

*      Camb.  Phil.  Tr.  No.  xi,  "On  propositions  numerically  definite," 

xxxvii. 

Bowen,  F.     Treatise  on  Logic  (1872),  139. 
Brentano,  F.     Psychologic  vom  empirischen  Standpunkte  (1874),  165. 

*  Cayley,  A.    Note  on  the  Calculus  of  Logic.     (Quart.  Journ.  of  pure  and 

app.  Math.  1871.) 
Chase,  D.  P.    First  Logic  Book  (1875),  94. 


440  Index  of  Bibliographical  References. 

»  Clifford,  W.  K.     Lectures  and  Essays  (1879),  258,  354. 
Contemporary  Review  (1873),  9. 
Dalgarno,  G.     Ars  signorum  (ed.  1834),  99. 

*  Darjes,  J.  G.     Weg  zur  Wahrheit  (1776),  52,  54,  94,  138,  413. 
•Delbceuf,  J.     Logique  algorithmique  (1877),  95,  98,  163,  409. 
*De  Morgan,  A.    Formal  Logic  (1847),  9,  18,  95,  370,  416,  428. 

«        Camb.  Phil.  Trant.  (vii,  viii,  ix,  x),  14,  182,  330,  352,  366, 

389,  404. 

Trigonometry  and  Double  Algebra  (1849),  xiii,  68. 
Syllabus  of  a  proposed  Sj stern  of  Logic  (1860),  xxiii,  134, 

225,  404. 
English  Cyclopedia.    Article  ' Logic'.     134. 

*  Drobisch,  M.  W.     Neue  Darstellung  der  Logik  (1875),  94,  411. 

*  Ellis,  A.  J.    Algebraical  Analogies  of  Logical  relations,  (Proc.  of  R.  Society, 

Vol.  21),  144. 
Ellis,  B.  L.     Edition  of  Bacon's  Works  (1858),  xxxi. 

Mathematical  and  other  writings  (1863),  404. 

Erdmann,  J.  E.     Geschichte  der  neuern  Philosophic  (1834 — 53),  81. 
Euler,  L.     Letters  to  a  German  Princess  (Ed.  Brewster,  1823),  15,  104,  424. 
*Frege,  G.     Begriffsschrift,  eine  der  arithmetischen  nachgebildete  Formel- 

sprache  des  reinen  Denkens  (1879),  341,  415. 
Gergonne,  3.D.   Essai  de  Dialectique  rationnelle  (Annales  deMathimatiques, 

Vol.  in.),  6,  95. 

Grassmann,  H.    Die  lineale  Ausdehnnngslehre  (1844),  xxxv,  97,  204. 
*Grassmann,  B.    Die  Begriffslehre  oder  Logik  (1872),  95,  189,  377,  384,  414. 

*  Giinther,  S.     Vierteljahrifchrift  fur  wiss.  Phil.  (1879 :— The  name  and  date 

are  erroneously  given  in  the  text),  78. 
•Halsted,  G.  B.     Journal  of  Spec.  Phil.  (XII.  1,  4 ;  XIII.  1),  78,  214. 

Algebras,  Spaces,  Logics  (Pop.  Sc.  Monthly,  Aug.  1880). 
Hamilton,  W.    Lectures  on  Logic  (1860),  8,  10,  17,  52,  94,  397,  417. 

Discussions  on  Philosophy  (1866),  xxx,  14,  421. 
Hamilton,  W.  B.    Elements  of  Quaternions  (1866),  55. 
Hankel,  H.    Vorlesungen  iiber  die  complexen  Zahlen  (1867),  xiii,  55,  68. 
*Harley,  B.     British  Quarterly  Review,  (July,  1866),  xxxviii. 

*  Reports  of  Brit.  Axsoc.  (1866,  1870),  xvii,  xxxi. 
Hauber,  F.  C.    Scholse  logico-mathematicoe  (1829),  275. 

Herbart,  J.  F.    Einleitung  in  die  Philosophie  (Ed.  iv.  1850),  134,  168. 
Hoffbaoer,  J.  C.    Analytik  der  Urtheile  und  SchlUsse  (1792),  411. 
'Holland,  G.  J.    Abhtmdlung  iiber  die  Mathematik,  die  allgemeine  Zeichen- 
kunst,  und  die  Verschicdenheit  der  Bechnungsarten  (1764),  xxxvi,  78, 
157,  409. 


Index  of  Bibliographical  References.  441 

*Hughlings,  I.  P.     The  Logic  of  Names,  an  Introduction  to  Boole's  Laws  of 

Thought  (1869),  307. 

Ingleby,  C.  M.     Outlines'of  Theoretical  Logic  (1856),  17. 
*Jevons,  W.  S.     Pure  Logic,  or  the  Logic  of  Quality  apart  from  Quantity 
(1864),  xxviii,  36,  136,  147,  383,  390. 

*  The  Substitution  of  Similars  (1869),  174. 

*  The  Principles  of  Science  (Ed.  n.  1877),  90,  121,  158,  162, 

256,  385. 

*  Studies  in  Deductive  Logic  (1880),  xxxix,  352. 
Kant,  I.     Logik  (Ed.  Kirchmann,  1876),  183,  428. 
Kircher,  A.    Ars  magna  sciendi  (1631),  99. 

KvSt,  F.  B.    Leibnitzens  Logik  (1857),  xxxii. 
Kelland  and  Tait,  Quaternions  (1873),  xiii. 
Lambert,  J.  H.    Neues  Organon  (1764),  36,  99,  434. 

*  Nova  Acta  Eruditorum  (1765),  xxxvi,  78,  419. 

*  Anlage  zur  Architectonic  (1771),  xxxv,  358,  403. 
Logische  und  philosophische  Abhandlungen  (1781),  157, 

195,  272,  321,  328,  383. 

*  Deutscher  gelehrter  Brief wechsel  (1781),  54,  78,  410. 
Lange,  F.  A.     Logische  Studien  (1877),  6,  17,  28,  36,  437. 

Lange,  J.  C.     Nucleus  logics  Weisianae  (1712),  423. 
Inventum  novum  Quadratilogici,  423. 

Latham,  E.  G.    Logic  in  its  application  to  Language  (1856),  428. 
Leechman,  J.    Logic  (1864),  428. 
*Leibnitz,  G.  W.     Opera  philosophica  (Erdmann's  Ed.  1840),  xxxi,  52,  54,  57, 

98,  146;  157,  165,  382,  386,  417. 
*Liard,  L.    Les  logiciens  anglais  contemporains  (1878),  xxxix. 

*       Revue  Philosophique  (March,  September,  1877),  xxxix. 

Lindsay,  T.  M.    Ueberweg's  Logic  (1871),  173. 

Lipschitz,  B.     Grundlagen  der  Analysis  (1877),  xiii. 
Maass,  J.  G.  E.     Grundriss  der  Logik  (1793),  95,  371,  428. 
*Maecoll,  H.    Proc.  of  Lond.  Math.  Soc.  (Vol.   IX.  pp.  9—20,  177—186; 
X.  pp.  16—28;  XI.  163),  95,  341,  372,  376. 

*         Mind  (Jan.  1880),  372. 

•Macfarlane,  A.    Algebra  of  Logic  (1879),  112,  185,  188,  328,  366,  408. 

*  Proc.  of  E.  Soc.  Edinb.  (1879),  404. 

•Maimon,  S.    Versuch  einer  neuen  Logik  (1794),  52,  54,  94,  377,  420. 
Mansel,  H.  L.     Prolegomena  Logica  (1860),  124,  133. 

Aldrich  (1862),  136. 

Maxwell,  J.  C.     Matter  and  Motion  (1876),  xii. 
Mill,  J.  S.    Examination  of  Sir  W.  Hamilton's  Philosophy  (1865),  345. 


442  Index  of  Bibliographical  References. 

Mill,  J.  S.     System  of  Logic  (1868),  133. 

•Murphy,  J.  J.    Belation  of  Logic  to  Language  (Belfast  Natural  Hist,  and 
Phil.  Soc.  1875),  163,  404,  409. 

*  Mind  (Jan.  1877),  409. 

On  an  extension  of  the  Ordinary  Logic,  connecting  it  with  the 
Logic  of  Kelatives  (Manchester  Lit.  and  Phil.  Soc.  1880), 
404. 

*Peirce,  C.  S.     (Proceedings  of  American  Acad.  of  Arts  and  Sciences,  1867), 
97,  189,  404. 

*         Journal  of  Spec.  Phil.  (1868,  three  papers),  134,  146,  341, 

383. 

American  Journal  of  Mathematics,  Vol.  III.  (18SO),  189. 

*Ploucquet,  G.     Sammlung  der  Schriften  welche  den  logischen  Kalkul  des 

Herrn  Prof.  Ploucquet's  betreffen  (1773),  xxxi,  8,  57,  95,  138,  157,  382, 
416. 

*Biehl,  A.     Vierteljahrsschrift  fiir  wiss.  Phil.  (1877),  158. 
Biidiger,  A.     De  sensu  veri  et  falsi  (1741),  xi. 

*  Scheffler,  H.    Die  Naturgesetze,  Vol.  III.  (1880),  xxx,  426. 

•Schroder,  E.     Operationskreis  des  Logikkalkuls  (1877),  78,  95,  112,   383, 
387,  389. 

Lehrbuch  der  Arithmetik  und  Algebra  (1873),  xiii. 

Zeitschrift  fiir  Math,  und  Pkys.  (1880),  390. 

•Segner,  J.  A.     Specimen  logic®  universaliter  demonstrates  (1740),  xxxi,  95, 
184,  412,  419. 

*  Semler,  C.  A.     Versuch  iiber  die  combinatorische  Methode  (1811),  351, 402. 
Servois.     Gergonne's  Annales  de  Mathtmatiques  (Vol.  V.),  55. 

Sigwart,  C.    Logik  (1873),  134. 

*  Solly,  T.     Syllabus  of  Logic  (1839),  9. 

Spalding,  W.    Introduction  to  Logical  Science  (1857),  x,  88,  136. 
Spottiswoode,  W.     Remarks  on  some  recent  generalizations  of  Algebra 

(Proc.  of  Lond.  Math.  Soc.  1872),  90. 

Sweet,  H.    Words,  Logic  and  Grammar  (Trans.  ofPhilolog.  Soc.  1876),  xxvi. 
Thoughts  on  Logic,  or  the  S.  N.  I.  X.  prepositional  Theory  (1877),  6. 
Thomson,  W.     Laws  of  Thought  (1876),  12,  17,  286. 
Trendelenburg,  A.     Logische  Untersuchungen  (1862),  397. 

Historische  Beitrage  (1867),  99. 
Twesten,  A.  D.  C.    Logik  (1825),  6,  52,  397. 

Ueberweg,  F.    System  of  Logic  (translated  by  T.  M.  Lindsay,  1871),  13, 134. 
I' Inch.  J.  H.    Institutions  logicte  et  metaphysics  (1792),  432. 
Ulrici,  H.     Zeitschrift  fiir  Phil,  undphil.  Kritik  (1878),  303. 
Univertity  Magazine  (Jan.,  Feb.,  Mar.,  1878),  xxxviii. 


Index  of  Bibliographical  References.  443 

Venn,  J.     Logic  of  Chance,  (Ed.  n.  1876),  332. 

*  — •      Hind  (Oct.  1876;  July,  1880),  viii. 

*  • •      Philosophical  Magazine  (July,  1880),  viii. 

* Princeton  Review  (Sep.  1880),  viii. 

*       Camb.  Phil  Trans.  (Dec.  1880),  viii. 

Vives,  L.    De  censura  veri  (1555),  422. 
Weise,  Ch.    Nucleus  logicaa  Weisianas,  423. 

Wilkins,  J.    Essay  towards  a  real  character  and  philosophical  language 

(1668),  99. 

Wolf,  Ch.    Psychologia  empirica  (1779),  98. 
•Wundt,  W.    Logik  (1880),  79,  91,  95,  184,  189,  383,  408. 

To  the  above  list  the  following  works  may  be  added.  I  have  found 
references  to  them  of  a  kind  which  make  me  suppose  that  they  must  be  of 
interest  on  this  subject ;  but  every  effort  to  discover  their  existence  in  this 
country,  or  to  obtain  them  from  abroad,  has  proved  fruitless. 

Busch,  M.    Anfangsgriinde  der  logikalischen  Algebra  (Tiibingen,  1768). 
Castillon,  G.  F.     Sur  un  nouvel  algorithme  logiijue  (Berlin,  1803). 
Schlosser,   F.  P.    Disputatio  de  sororio  Logices  et  Matheseos  nexu,  et 

applieatione  praBceptorum  logicorum  in  disciplinis  mathematicis  (1727). 
Tonnies.    De    Logic®    scientiae    ad    exemplum   arithmetics    instituendf. 

ratione  (1762). 


INDEX   OF  SUBJECT  MATTER. 


Abacus,  logical,  121 
Abstraction,  78,  96,  397,  418 
AfiiniiiUivi:  propositions,  155 
Aggregation  of  classes,  39 
Algorithm,  98 

Alternative  propositions,  172 
Alternatives,  exclusive,  xv,  39, 52,  381 
Anticipations  of  Boole,  xxx 
Associative  law,  51 

Characteristic,  98 

Class  inclusion  and  exclusion,  2,  6, 
28,  392 

Classes,  aggregation  of,  39,  44. 
contradictory,  95,  352 
exception  of,  46,  53 
extinction  of,  117,  147,  271 
restriction  of,  47,  64,  71 

Coextensive  terms,  393 

Combinational  method,  351 

Commutative  law,  xv,  51, 55,  93,  401 

Comprehension,  54 

Conversion,  xxi,  218,  355 

Determination,  78,  420 
Development,  190,  386 


Diagrams,  Eulerian,  15, 113, 421 

history  of,  420 

improved,  101 

linear,  14,  420 

mechanical,  122 

shaded,  112 
Dichotomy,  191,  350 
Dictum,  Aristotelian,  286,  320 
Disjunctives,  114,  433 
Duality,  law  of,  56,  401 
Elimination,  285,  361 
Equations,  groups  of,  240 

logical,  222 

negative  interpretation  of,  244 
Excluded  middle,  256 
Existential  propositions,  135, 165, 406 
Expansion,  190 

examples  of,  217 

rules  for,  200,  209 
Exponential  notation,  xi 

Fractional  forms,  67,  81 
Fractions,  reciprocal,  86 
Functions  in  Logic,  87,  197 

Generalizations,  xxii,  350 


Index  of  Subject-matter. 


445 


Hypothetical  interpretation,  111,  126, 

141 
Hypothetical,  135,  274,  326,  377, 

432 
destructive,  339 

Implication,  376,  406 

Import  of  Affirmatives,  130,  223 

Negatives,  131 
Indeterminate  symbols,  161,  203,  214, 

229,  292,  307 
Infinite  terms,  183,  416 
Inflections,  330 

Intensive  rendering,  36,  390,  417 
Inverse  operations,  68 

indefiniteness  of,  69,  77,  402 

Law,  commutative,  51,  55,  93,  401 
distributive,  55 
of  contradiction,  84 
Law  of  Simplicity  or  Duality,  xxxi, 

66,  401 
Limiting  cases,  xxiv,  157,  168,  338, 

376,  410 
Logic  of  Kelatives,  xvii,  xxxv,  399 

Mathematics,  language  of,  xv,  89. 

Negative  subjects,  137,  180,  412 
Negative,  universal,  159,  405 

various  renderings  of,  405 
Nominalistic  view,  65 
Numerical  Logic,  385 

Probability,  379,  437 
Propositions,  affirmative,  130,  154 

arrangement  of,  5,  170 

classification  of,  257 

compartment  theory  of,  23,  105 

contradictory,  354,  413 

Hamiltonian,  8,  13 

incompatible,  145,  348 

independent,  150 


infinite,  183 
intensive,  394,  417 
interpretation  of,  111,  126,  141, 

223 

limitative,  139 
merits  of  old  scheme  of,  14 
negative,  131,  159 
particular,  30,  131, 160,  306,  418 
predicative  view  of,  3 
secondary,  345 

symbolic  expression  of,  31,  154 
tabular  comparison,  31,  170 
truth  of,  369 

Quantification  of  Predicate,  xxvii,  8, 

173, 325,  417 
Quaternions,  90,  226,  363 

Eelatives,  Logic  of,  xvii,  xxxv,  400 
Eepresentation  of  terms,  103 

propositions,  109 
Restriction,  logical,  54,  71 

Sign  of  addition,  51,  93,  396,  413 

connection,  97 

division,  67,  273,  387,  397,  410 

equality,  64 

implication,  414 

inclusion,  411 

infinity,  205 

multiplication,  54,  GO,  397 

subtraction,  53,  61,  82,  387,  409, 
417 

unity,  58,  189,  193,  373,  384 

zero,  58,  374 
'Some',  meaning  of,  7,  10,  164,  213, 

219,  307 

Square,  diagrammatic,  426 
Syllogism,  xx,  17,  318 

Boole's  view  of,  320 

symbolic  view  of,  320 

compartment  view  of,  18 


446 


Index  of  Subject-matter. 


Symbolic  language,  xv,  88 
variations,  95 

Symbols,  adaptation  of,  37 
of  classes,  33 
extended  use  of,  xv,  90 
objections  to,  88 
of  operations,  36 
of  propositions,  363 
symmetrical,  415 


Truth  of  propositions,  369 

•witnesses,  370 

Uninterpretable  expressions,  73,  201 
Unity,  signification  of,  189,  373 
Universe,  logical,  128, 180,  408 

symbol  for,  57,  180,  384 

Wechselbegriffe,  392 
Witnesses,  truth  of,  370 


CAMBHIDOE  :   PBIN1ED   BY  0.   J.   CLAY,   JI.A,   AT   1HE   OVXtaBHCT 


MESSES.  MACMILLAN  AND  CO.'S  PUBLICATIONS. 

BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR. 

On   some  Characteristics  of  Belief,  Scientific  and  Re- 
ligious.    Hulsean  Lectures  for  1869.     8vo.     Is.  6d. 

The  Logic  of  Chance:  an  Essay  on  the  Foundations  and 
Province  of  the  Theory  of  Probability,  with  Special  Eeference  to  its 
Logical  Bearings,  and  its  Application  to  Moral  and  Social  Science. 
Second  Edition,  re-written  and  greatly  enlarged.  Crown  8vo.  10s.  6d. 

"One  of  the  most  thoughtful  and  philosophical  treatises  on  any  subject 
connected  with  Logic  and  Evidence  which  has  been  produced  in  this  or  any 
other  country  for  many  years." — MILL'S  Logic,  Vol.  n.  p.  77.  Seventh 
Edition. 


WORKS  BY  W.  STANLEY  JEVONS,  LL.D.,  M.A.,  F.R.S. 

The  Principles  of  Science.     A  Treatise  on  Logic  and  Scien- 
tific Method.     New  and  Cheaper  Edition,  revised.    Crown  8vo.     12s.  6d. 

The  Substitution  of  Similars  the  True  Principle  of 
Reasoning.  Derived  from  a  Modification  of  Aristotle's 
Dictum.  Fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

Elementary  Lessons  in   Logic:  Deductive  and  Inductive. 

With  copious  Questions  and  Examples,  and  a  Vocabulary  of  Logical 
Terms.     Sixth  Edition.     18mo.     3s.  Qd. 

Primer  of  Logic.     ISmo.     Is. 

The  Theory  of  Political  Economy.    Second  Edition,  Revised 

and  Enlarged,  with  New  Preface,  &c.    8vo.     10s.  6d, 

Primer  of  Political  Economy.     18mo.     Is. 

Studies    in    Deductive    Logic.     A    Manual   for   Students. 
Crown  8vo.     6s. 


Manual  of  Political  Economy.  Fifth  Edition,  Revised  and 
Enlarged,  with  New  Chapters  on  the  Depreciation  of  Silver.  By  the 
Pdght  Hon.  Henry  Fawcett,  M.P.  Crown  8vo.  12s. 

Guide  to  the  Study  of  Political    Economy.     From  the 

Italian  of  DE  LUIGI  COSSA,  Professor  in  the  University  of  Pavia.    With  a 
Preface  by  W.  Stanley  Jevons,  F.B.S.     Crown  8vo.    4s.  Qd. 

MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  LONDON. 


MESSRS.  MACMILLAN  AND  CO.'S  PUBLICATIONS. 

An  Investigation  of  the  Laws  of  Thought,  on  which  are 

founded  the  Mathematical  Theories  of  Logic  and  Probabilities.  By 
GEORGE  BOOLE,  LL.D.,  Professor  of  Mathematics  in  the  Queen's  Uni- 
versity, Ireland,  &c.  8vo.  14s. 

Lectures  on   the   History  of  Ancient   Philosophy.    By 

W.  ARCHER  BUTLER,  late  Professor  of  Moral  Philosophy  in  the  University 
of  Dublin.  Edited  from  the  Author's  MSS.,  with  Notes,  by  WILLIAM 
HafwoRTH  THOMPSON,  M.A.,  Master  of  Trinity  College,  and  Regius 
Professor  of  Greek  in  the  University  of  Cambridge.  New  and  Cheaper 
Edition,  revised  by  the  Editor.  8vo.  12s. 

Lectures  and  Essays.  By  the  late  Professor  W.  K.  CLIFFORD, 
F.R.  S.  Edited  by  LESLIE  STEPHEN  and  FREDERICK  POLLOCK,  with 
Introduction  by  F.  POLLOCK.  Two  Portraits.  2  vols.  8vo.  25s. 

Outlines  of  Cosmic  Philosophy,  based  on  the  Doctrine 
of  Evolution,  with  Criticisms  on  the  Positive 
Philosophy.  By  JOHN  FISKE,  M.A.,  LL.B.,  formerly 
Lecturer  on  Philosophy  at  Harvard  University.  2  vols.  8vo.  25s. 

Moral   and   Metaphysical   Philosophy.    Vol.   i.    Ancient 

Philosophy  from  the  First  to  the  Thirteenth  Centuries;  Vol.  n.  The 
Fourteenth  Century  and  the  French  Revolution,  with  a  glimpse  into  the 
Nineteenth  Century.  By  Rev.  F.  D.  MAURICE,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Moral 
Philosophy  in  the  University  of  Cambridge.  New  Edition  and  Preface. 
2  vols.  8vo.  25s. 

The  Methods  of  Ethics.    By  HENRY  SIDGWICK,  M.A.,  Pne- 

lector  in  Moral  and  Political  Philosophy  in  Trinity  College,  Cambridge. 
Second  Edition,  revised  throughout  with  important  additions.  8vo.  14«. 
A  SUPPLEMENT  to  the  First  Edition,  containing  all  the  important 
additions  and  alterations  in  the  Second.  8vo.  2s. 


WORKS  BY  H.  MAUDSLEY,   M.D., 

Professor  of  Medical  Jurisprudence  in  University  College,  London. 

The  Physiology  of  Mind;  being  the  First  Part  of  a  Third 
Edition,  Revised,  Enlarged,  and  in  great  part  Re- written,  of  "The 
Physiology  and  Pathology  of  Mind."  Crown  8vo.  10s.  Gd. 

The  Pathology  of  Mind.  Revised,  Enlarged,  and  in  great 
part  Re-written.  8vo.  18*. 

Body  and  Mind:  an  Inquiry  into  their  Connexion  and  Mutual 
Influence,  specially  with  reference  to  Mental  Disorders.  An  Enlarged 
and  Revised  Edition.  To  which  are  added,  Psychological  Essays. 
Crown  8 vo.  6*.  6d. 

MACMILLAN  AND   CO.,   LONDON. 


IT" 


• 


..